OK, IT
IS NOW SIX 00 TWO
P.M. AND I.
GOOD EVENING.
>> I'M CALLING THIS MEETING TO
ORDER.
MY NAME IS GABRIEL HARPE, CHAIR
OF THE NARBOROUGH ENERGY
COMMISSION AS CHAIR I'M CALLING
THIS MEETING TO ORDER AND WE
ARE HOLDING THIS MEETING FROM
COUNCIL CHAMBERS AND OUR CITY.
>> WELCOME TO THE JANUARY 14TH,
2002 FIVE MEETING OF THE ENERGY
COMMISSION COMMISSIONERS.
LET'S SEE PUBLIC COMMENT TODAY
WILL BE VIA TELEPHONE ONLY TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
SORRY AND IN PERSON AND A
PERSON WE'RE REVISING THE
SCRIPT A LITTLE BIT HERE TO
SPEAK DURING ANY OF THE PUBLIC
COMMENT OPPORTUNITIES PLEASE
CALL ONE OF THE FOLLOWING TOLL
TWO TOLL FREE NUMBERS EIGHT
SEVEN SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE
FIVE TO FOUR SEVEN OR EIGHT
EIGHT EIGHT SEVEN EIGHT EIGHT
ZERO ZERO NINE NINE AND ENTER
THE MEETING ID NUMBER NINE FIVE
SIX EIGHT SEVEN ONE EIGHT SEVEN
EIGHT SEVEN SIX ON YOUR PHONE.
THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
AVAILABLE ON THE PUBLIC AGENDA
AND THE PUBLIC NOTICES SECTION
OF THE CITY'S WEBSITE AND ON
THE BROADCAST OF THE MEETING ON
CHANNEL 16, AT&T CHANNEL 99 AND
ONLINE AT TWO GOV BORGHT WATCH
C10 AND WE ALSO HAVE PUBLIC
COMMENT VIA THE PODIUM HERE AND
COUNCIL CHAMBERS AS WELL.
WE WILL MOVE ON TO THE LAND
ACKNOWLEDGMENT.
JOE, DO YOU PLEASE READING THE
LAND ACKNOWLEDGMENT?
>> YES.
I ACKNOWLEDGE THAT THE LAND THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR OCCUPIES THE
ANCESTRAL, TRADITIONAL AND
CONTEMPORARY LANDS OF THE
ANISHINAABE INCLUDING DAFWA,
OJIBWAY, POTTAWATOMIE AND
WYANDOT PEOPLES.
I FURTHER ACKNOWLEDGE THAT OUR
CITY STANDS LIKE ALMOST ALL
PROPERTY IN THE UNITED STATES
ON LANDS OBTAINED SEEING OTHER
PEOPLE JOINING OH WAIT HOLD UP
A MINUTE IN YOUR COUNCIL
CHAMBERS.
OH WE ARE WE'RE HERE.
>> WE SEE YOU.
OH CRIMINY I FORGOT IT WAS IN
PERSON.
>> OK, IT'S ALL RIGHT OK WE'LL
DO OUR BEST TO MAKE THIS WORK.
I'M SO SORRY.
NO I CAN COME DOWN.
I JUST WAS CONFUSED LIKE WHERE
IS EVERYBODY OK I'LL BE THERE
IN LIKE TEN MINUTES.
I'M ALL RIGHT BACK TO LAND
ACKNOWLEDGMENT PARTY SO THAT
FURTHER KNOWLEDGE THAT OUR CITY
STANDS LIKE ALMOST ALL PROPERTY
IN THE UNITED STATES ON LANDS
OBTAINED GENERALLY IN
UNCONSCIONABLE WAYS FROM
INDIGENOUS PEOPLES.
THE TAKING OF THIS LAND WAS
FORMALIZED BY THE TREATY
OF DETROIT IN 1887 KNOWING
WHERE WE LIVE, WORK STUDY AND
RECREATED DOES NOT CHANGE THE
PAST BUT A THOROUGH
UNDERSTANDING OF THE ONGOING
CONSEQUENCES OF THIS PAST CAN
EMPOWER US IN OUR WORK TO
CREATE A FUTURE THAT SUPPORTS
HUMAN FLOURISHING AND JUSTICE
FOR ALL INDIVIDUALS.
>> THANK YOU JOE.
WOULD YOU MIND TAKING THE ROLE
YOU DON'T HAVE TO SAY WHERE YOU
ARE BECAUSE I CAN SEE YOU
COMMISSIONER BERKOWITZ,
PRESIDENT PRESENT COUNCILOR
BRIGGS IS ON THEIR WAY.
>> COMMISSIONER COLVIN GARCíA
GEREB PRESENT VICE.
>> YOUR HANDS HAD A CONFLICT
COME UP.
COMMISSIONER LEVERNE HERE
COUNCIL MEMBER MALLOCK HERE
COMMISSIONER GURSKY HERE AND
COMMISSIONER OVERPECK ALSO HAS
A CONFLICT TONIGHT.
>> BUT CHAIR YOU HAVE A QUORUM
BACK TO YOU.
>> THANK YOU, JOE.
WE'LL MOVE ON TO THE APPROVAL
OF THE AGENDA.
>> IS THERE A MOTION TO
APPROVE?
THE AGENDA IS POSTED AND A
SECOND.
THANK YOU, COMMISSIONER COLVIN
GARCIA.
OK, COMMISSIONERS PLEASE RAISE
YOUR HAND IF YOU WANT TO
PROPOSE ANY CHANGES OR
DISCUSSION ISSUE SEEING NO
HANDS RAISED, ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF PREVENTING THE AGENDA
AS POSTED, PLEASE RAISE YOUR
HAND AND SAY AY AY ALL THOSE
OPPOSED PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND
AND SAY NO MOTION CARRIES THE
AGENDA APPROVED.
AND NOW TO THE APPROVAL OF THE
MINUTES.
IS THERE A MOTION TO APPROVE
MINUTES AS POSTED AND THE
SECOND SO MOVED AND SECONDED
COMMISSIONERS PLEASE RAISE YOUR
HAND IF YOU WANT TO DISCUSS ANY
ANY ASPECT OF THE MINUTES SEE
NO HANDS RAISED ALL THOSE IN
FAVOR OF APPROVING MINUTES AS
POSTED.
PLEASE RAISE YOUR HAND AND SAY
I I ALL THOSE POSTS PLEASE SAY
NO.
>> THE MINUTES ARE APPROVED
MOVING ON TO THE PUBLIC INPUT
PORTION OF OUR AGENDA.
>> THIS IS AN OPPORTUNITY FOR
PEOPLE TO SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE
MINUTES IF YOU ARE WATCHING ON
GTN PLEASE CALL EIGHT EIGHT
EIGHT SEVEN EIGHT EIGHT ZERO
ZERO NINE NINE OR EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND INTERMEETING I'D
NINE FIVE SIX EIGHT SEVEN ONE
EIGHT SEVEN EIGHT SEVEN SIX.
AND THIS INFORMATION IS ALSO
DISPLAYED ON THE MEETING AGENDA
AND VIDEO FEED CITY STAFF WILL
SELECT CALLERS THAT RAISE THEIR
HAND ONE BY ONE USING THE LAST
THREE DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE
NUMBER TO RAISE YOUR HAND AND
YOUR DESIRE TO SPEAK PLEASE
PRESS STAR NINE ON YOUR PHONE
AND YOU'LL HEAR AN AUTOMATED
ANNOUNCEMENT THAT'S ALLOWING
THE THE HOST IS ALLOWING YOU TO
SPEAK WHEN SPEAKING PLEASE MOVE
TO A QUIET AREA.
>> I MEAN ANY BACKGROUND SOUND
SO THAT WE MAY OR YOU CLEARLY
AND PLEASE STATE YOUR NAME AND
ADDRESS AT THE BEGINNING
OF YOUR COMMENTS AND FOR THOSE
IN ATTENDANCE PLEASE APPROACH
THE PODIUM
.
THANK YOU.
HERE NUMBER TWENTY EIGHT WE
WERE ON I SURE KNOW HOW TO DO
IT.
>> THERE WE GO.
THANKS.
AS I WAS SAYING CAN NUMBER
TWENTY EIGHT HOMECOURT THIS IS
KIND OF SURREAL BUT NICE.
>> I'M GLAD YOU'RE DOING THIS
AND I HOPE YOU DO MORE OF THESE
IN PERSON.
>> I THINK THE COMMISSIONER
MIRSKY AND COMMISSIONER COLEMAN
GARCíA MAY REMEMBER AS I DO THE
LAST TIME ENERGY COMMISSION MET
IN PERSON WHICH IS IN MARCH
TWENTY TWENTY AT THE AMBROSINI
CENTER ON BALDWIN FOR A WORK
SESSION AT THAT MEETING I WAS
THERE AS A MEMBER OF THE PUBLIC
AND I WAS PUSHING ENERGY
COMMISSION TO MOVE FORWARD WITH
AN ORDINANCE TO BAN GAS
CONNECTIONS IN NEW CONSTRUCTION
.
WELL THAT THAT HAS SINCE GONE
OFF THE TABLE BUT THE PROBLEM
IS NOT GOING AWAY AND BASICALLY
ALMOST NOTHING HAS BEEN DONE IN
THE LAST FIVE YEARS ON THIS
ISSUE AND WE'RE STILL APPROVING
NEW CONSTRUCTION WITH GAS
CONNECTIONS WHICH IN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE JUST PUTTING FOSSIL
FUEL INFRASTRUCTURE IN NEW
BUILDINGS.
>> SYSTMES EVEN I MEAN IT
WOULD SEEM CRAZY TO ME THEN BUT
NOW IT JUST SEEMS I DON'T
UNDERSTAND WHY WE'RE NOT MAKING
PROGRESS ON THIS ANYWAY TONIGHT
I REALLY LOOK FORWARD TO THE
BENCHMARKING PRESENTATION BY
MR. DALEY.
I HAVEN'T HAD A CHANCE TO
REALLY LOOK OVER THE REPORT AND
THE SLIDES IN DETAIL BUT I HAVE
A FEW QUESTIONS.
>> THE REPORT MENTIONS A NEARLY
TENFOLD FOLD INCREASE IN
COMPLIANCE FROM MAY TO
DECEMBER.
TWENTY TWENTY FOUR CLEARLY
THERE'S BEEN A HEROIC EFFORT
MADE BY MR. DALEY AND PROBABLY
OTHERS TO BRING BUILDING OWNERS
IN LINE.
SO I THANK THEM FOR THAT.
THEY DESERVE A LOT OF CREDIT ON
BUT THERE'S STILL A HUGE
SHORTFALL.
THE TWO ZERO PLAN TIMELINE
SPECIFIES A 90 PERCENT
COMPLIANCE RATE BY TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE AND HERE WE ARE.
THE ACTUAL COMPLIANCE RATE AS I
READ THE REPORT IS THIRTY TWO
PERCENT FOR THE MOST RECENT
REPORTING YEAR TWENTY TWENTY
THREE WITH A FIFTY PERCENT
PARTICIPATION RATE.
SO I GUESS ONE QUESTION I WOULD
HAVE IS WHEN WILL THE CITY
START TO LEVY THE FINES FOR
NONCOMPLIANCE THAT ARE
SPECIFIED IN THE BENCHMARKING
ORDINANCE?
I THINK THAT'S FIVE HUNDRED
DOLLARS FOR FIRST OFFENSE AND
ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR EVERY
ADDITIONAL OFFENSE OR MAYBE
WE'RE DOING THAT ALREADY AND
I'M NOT AWARE OF IT.
MY OTHER QUESTION TECHNICAL IN
THE WIDE BENCHMARKING SLIDE
THERE'S AN EXAMPLE INCLUDED FOR
A BUILDING PROFILE FOR THE
FOURTEENTH FOR 13 YEARS TURON
WHICH I THINK IS THE FOUNDRY
LOFT BUILDING BASED ON THE
INDICATED ELECTRIC AND GAS
USAGE.
>> THIRTY SECONDS USAGE.
THANK YOU.
I DID MY OWN CALCULATIONS CAME
UP WITH GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS ABOUT TWENTY FOUR
PERCENT HIGHER THAN WHAT'S ON
THE SLIDE.
>> I'M USING OVERSIZE
ELECTRICITY CONVERSION FACTOR
BUT I'M USING MY OWN GAS
CONVERSION FACTOR BASED ON ONE
THAT NASA CLIMATE SCIENTIST
PETER COMIS RECOMMENDS WHICH
INCLUDES ALL UPSTREAM
EMISSIONS.
SO I'M JUST WONDERING WHY THE
DIFFERENCE AND IT'S A QUESTION
I CAN PROBABLY DEAL WITH
OFFLINE WITH STAFF BUT THOSE
ARE MY QUESTIONS AND IT'S GREAT
TO SEE YOU ALL HERE AND THANK
YOU FOR YOUR WORK VOLUNTEER
WORK ON THE COMMISSION.
>> THANK YOU.
NO CALLERS ONLINE
.
>> OK, WE WILL MOVE ON TO THE
MAIN PRESENTATION OF TODAY'S
AGENDA.
THIS IS THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
ENERGY AND WATER BENCHMARKING
ANNUAL REPORT AND THE REPORT
AND THE PRESENTATION ARE BOTH
ONLINE LINKED TO THE MEETING
NOTES AGENDA.
>> JOE, WOULD YOU JUST MIND
INTRODUCING BRIEFLY THE SPEAKER
?
YEAH.
JOINING US TODAY IS CONNOR
DAILY.
CONNOR IS A ENERGY COORDINATOR
HERE WITH THE OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY INNOVATIONS.
CONNOR STARTED JANUARY FEBRUARY
ONE ON JANUARY 29TH.
>> YEAH, SO YOU KNOW, DEPENDING
HOW YOU DEFINE STARTING BUT
EITHER WAY STARTED HERE WITH US
IN TWENTY TWENTY FOUR CONNOR
HAS BEEN DOING A LOT OF WORK
MOST NOTABLY AS HE'S HERE TO
TALK ABOUT TONIGHT ON THE
BENCHMARKING ORDINANCE TAKING
THIS PROGRAM OVER AS MANY
OF YOU REMEMBER THE IS THE ONE
WHO WAS PREVIOUSLY RUNNING IT
BOUGHT THE WAS DEPARTING CONNOR
IS
THE ONE WHO TOOK OVER AND
HAS BEEN JUST DOING YOU KNOW,
AS YOU'LL TALK ABOUT HERE A LOT
OF WORK TO KIND OF GET THINGS
TO WHERE WE ARE RIGHT NOW.
HE'S BEEN JUST DOING A LOT A
LOT OF WORK WITH BOTH TWENTY
THIRTY DISTRICT AS WELL AS
BUILDING OWNERS ALL ACROSS ANN
ARBOR TO GET US TO WHERE WE ARE
TODAY AND ALL OF THAT HAS LED
TO BEING ABLE TO PUT OUT OUR
FIRST REPORT WHICH I KNOW IS A
TOPIC THAT WE'VE DISCUSSED MANY
TIMES WANTING TO SEE SAID
REPORT.
SO WE HAVE IT NOW.
>> HAPPY TO TALK ABOUT IT.
I WILL TURN IT OVER TO CONNOR
TESTING.
OH WELL THANK YOU ALL FOR
HAVING ME.
IT'S EXCITING TO BE ABLE TO
GIVE THIS PRESENTATION SO I
WILL GET RIGHT TO IT FIRST.
CONNOR DALY HE HIM I AM AN
ENERGY COORDINATOR WITH OSES
OFFICE.
AH WELL THE CITY'S OFFICE
OF SUSTAINABILITY AND
INNOVATIONS LIKE JOE SAID I
STARTED IN JANUARY TECHNICALLY
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR AND TOOK
OVER MANAGING THE BENCHMARKING
ORDINANCE IN MAY OF TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR AFTER HIS
DEPARTURE.
>> SO WHAT I'M MAINLY FOCUSED
ON TONIGHT IS THE REPORT
RECENTLY PUBLISHED SUMMARIZING
BASICALLY WHERE WE ARE WITH THE
ORDINANCE AND WHAT'S COMING
NEXT.
THE REPORT IS SIXTY SIX PAGES
SO I'M NOT GOING TO COVER EVERY
SINGLE PAGE BUT I'M HAPPY TO
TAKE QUESTIONS AT THE END ABOUT
ANYTHING PRESENTATION OR
REPORT.
WHAT I'LL START WITH IS A BRIEF
BACKGROUND OF THE ORDINANCE
ITSELF THEN GET TO SOME OF THE
KEY FINDINGS FROM THE REPORT
COMPLIANCE RATES DATA
ACCESSIBILITY DATA ACCURACY AND
ANY TRENDS WE CAN SEE AT THE
MOMENT IN THE DATA WE HAVE.
>> SO STARTING OFF AS YOU
PROBABLY BENCHMARKING IS
SPECIFICALLY CALLED OUT IN THE
ZERO PLAN IN THE STRATEGY THREE
SIGNIFICANTLY IMPROVING THE
ENERGY EFFICIENCY IN OUR
BUILDINGS.
THE ORDINANCE ITSELF WAS PASSED
IN OCTOBER TWENTY TWENTY ONE
AND IT REQUIRED PROPERTIES TO
USE ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO
MANAGER A FREE TOOL THROUGH THE
US EPA TO TRACK THEIR ENERGY
AND WATER USAGE AND THEN REPORT
THAT TO THE CITY THROUGH THE
TOOL.
I'M TAKING ONE STEP BACK TO
START.
YOU PROBABLY REMEMBER FROM A
RECENT GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS
INVENTORY PRESENTATION THAT
ABOUT TWO THIRDS OF OUR
EMISSIONS IN ANN ARBOR COME
FROM BUILDINGS ABOUT THIRTY
EIGHT PERCENT OF THOSE COMING
FROM RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES WHILE WE HAVE A LOT
OF PROGRAMS THAT TARGET
RESIDENTIAL PROPERTIES LIKE
SINGLE FAMILY HOMES AND SMALLER
UNDER FOUR UNDER PROPERTIES OR
FOUR UNITS IN A PROPERTY LIKE
THE HOME ENERGY ADVISOR
PROGRAM, THE HOME ENERGY REBATE
PROGRAM AND THE HEARD ORDINANCE
BENCHMARKING LOOKS AT THOSE
LARGER MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES
FOR MORE UNITS AND THEN
COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES.
SO THOSE OTHER SECTIONS
OF THOSE TWO EMISSION SECTORS
IT IS THE FIRST STEP FOR
ADDRESSING THOSE EMISSIONS AND
SPECIFICALLY TARGETS PROPERTIES
THAT ARE OVER TWENTY THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET OF GROSS AREA THAT
COULD BE ONE BUILDING THAT'S
OVER TWENTY THOUSAND SQUARE
FEET OR A CAMPUS AS IT'S CALLED
OF PROPERTY OR BUILDINGS THAT
COLLECTIVELY OVER TWENTY
THOUSAND SQUARE FEET TOGETHER.
WHY BENCHMARKING?
SO WE LIKE TO I LIKE TO SAY AT
FIRST THAT WHEN WE'RE LOOKING
AT BUILDING PERFORMANCE WE CAN
IMPROVE BUT WE CAN'T MEASURE
WHEN WE'RE LOOKING TO IMPROVE
BUILDING PERFORMANCE, WE WANT
TO KNOW WHERE WE'RE STARTING.
WE WANT TO KNOW WHERE WE'RE
GOING AND WE WANT TO KNOW WHERE
WE'RE AT ALONG THE WAY.
BENCHMARKING IS NOT ONLY
SOMETHING THAT IS BENEFICIAL
FOR THE CITY AS WE'RE LOOKING
TO DEVELOP PROGRAMS FOR
COMMERCIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING, IT IS HELPFUL FOR THE
DECISION MAKERS AT THOSE
PROPERTIES THAT COULD BE OWNERS
OR MANAGERS THAT ARE LOOKING TO
MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO THE
PROPERTIES OR IT COULD BE FOR
TENANTS WHO ARE LOOKING TO RENT
SPACES IN THOSE PROPERTIES.
WE DO ALSO SEE THAT THERE IS
ENERGY PRODUCTION ASSOCIATED
WITH BENCHMARKING.
THE APA THEMSELVES DID A STUDY
OF OVER THIRTY FIVE THOUSAND
BUILDINGS THAT USED ENERGY STAR
PORTFOLIO MANAGER OVER SEVERAL
YEARS AND THOSE PROPERTIES ON
AVERAGE IMPROVE THEIR ENERGY
PERFORMANCE BY ABOUT TWO POINT
FOUR PERCENT PER YEAR WHICH IS
SMALL IN ITSELF.
BUT OVER TIME A PRETTY
SIGNIFICANT REDUCTION IN ENERGY
USAGE.
I CAN IF THAT'S A I'VE NEVER
PRESENTED BEFORE ADDRESSED THE
PUBLIC COMMENT QUESTION ABOUT
THE THE SCORECARD HERE IT IS A
MOCK UP FROM OUR BENCHMARKING
COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE AND THE
NUMBERS WILL COME FROM THE
ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO MANAGER
WHICH FROM THE EPA THEY DO HAVE
SPECIFIC CONVERSION FACTORS
THAT THEY USE.
>> I IMAGINE THAT'S THE
DISCREPANCY BUT I'M HAPPY TO
LOOK INTO THAT SPECIFICALLY AS
THIS IF IF WE WT TO GET INTO
IT THIS IS ACTUALLY AN EXAMPLE
FROM OUR BENCHMARKING
COMPLIANCE SOFTWARE OF A
SCORECARD THAT A BUILDING COULD
GET ONCE THEY ARE BENCHMARKED
OF HERE'S YOUR PERFORMANCE,
HERE'S A EASY TO DIGEST FOR
SOMEONE WHO IS NOT TECHNICAL
ABOUT THIS AT A BUILDING OWNER
OR MANAGER LEVEL, HOW YOU'RE
PERFORMING, WHAT THE COST IS,
WHAT ARE SOME BASIC NEXT STEPS
TO TAKE.
SO AS WE'RE DEVELOPING THOSE
SCORECARDS, I'M HAPPY TO DIG
INTO THE NUMBERS MORE BUT I
IMAGINE IT'S BECAUSE OF THE
SPECIFIC FACTORS THAT ENERGY
STAR PORTFOLIO MANAGER USES
WHEN THEY DO THEIR CONVERSIONS
LOOKING AT WHO IS BENCHMARKING
AT THE MOMENT.
THIS IS IN THE REPORT.
APOLOGIES IT'S A LITTLE SMALL
IF YOU CAN MAKE IT OUT GREAT.
IF NOT IT IS IN THE REPORT BUT
THE TOPLINE NUMBERS HERE ARE
OF THE PROPERTIES CURRENTLY
BENCHMARKING PARTICIPATING WE
SEE THAT MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES
ARE THE MOST COMMON PROPERTY
AND THEY ACCOUNT FOR THE
LARGEST GROSS FLOOR AREA
OF PROPERTIES PARTICIPATING
PARTICIPATING MEANING THEY HAVE
STARTED BENCHMARKING THERE AND
INTRODUCED OUR PORTFOLIO
MANAGER THERE GATHERING DATA.
THEY MAY OR MAY NOT BE
COMPLETELY COMPLIANT BUT WE
KNOW WHO THEY ARE.
THEY KNOW WHAT WE KNOW WHAT
THEY ARE AND WE KNOW HOW BIG
THEY ARE.
SO MULTIFAMILY BEING THE
LARGEST AND MOST COMMON OFFICE
PROPERTIES BEING THE SECOND
MOST COMMON AND THE SECOND
LARGEST GROSS FLOOR AREA AND
THEN THE REMAINING 30 PERCENT
BEING SPLIT BETWEEN A WIDE
VARIETY OF PROPERTY USES.
>> I WILL SAY SPECIFICALLY
THERE THAT CURRENTLY
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES ACCOUNT
FOR FIFTY SEVEN PERCENT OF THE
GROSS FLOOR AREA AS THE
INCREASED PARTICIPATION AND
COMPLIANCE RATES FURTHER THAT'S
LIKELY TO CHANGE.
I'M NOT SURE HOW MUCH THAT MAY
AFFECT THE ACTUAL RATIO
OF PROPERTIES BUT OBVIOUSLY
WE'LL KEEP AN EYE ON THAT AS WE
AS WE GET THERE.
SO IN THE AUDIENCE ITSELF IT
DOES SPECIFY SOME KEY DATES TO
START.
THE ORIGINAL DEADLINES ARE ON
THE LEFT ON THE PRESENTATION
HERE AND THESE ARE THE
DEADLINES THE ORDINANCE SET
WHICH WERE THE FIRST DEADLINES
TO SUBMIT A BENCHMARKING REPORT
THAT WOULD BE FOR THE PREVIOUS
CALENDAR YEARS WORTH OF DATA.
SO IF WE'RE LOOKING AT A
PROPERTY THAT IS ONE HUNDRED
AND FIFTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
OF GROSS FLOOR AREA, THAT
PROPERTY ORIGINALLY INITIALLY
NEEDED TO SUBMIT A REPORT BY
JUNE 1ST TWENTY TWENTY TWO FOR
CALENDAR OR TWENTY TWENTY ONE
DATA.
LIKE I SAID I STARTED IN
JANUARY OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR
TOOK OVER IN MAY OF TWENTY
TWENTY FOUR APPROACHING THAT
DEADLINE WE REALIZED A FEW
THINGS ONE WHILE DATA IS
AVAILABLE PROCESSES WERE THERE,
THEY HAD BEEN REFINED AND WERE
BEING REFINED WITH THAT AND THE
SMALLER PROPERTIES JUST HAVING
REACHED THEIR FIRST INITIAL
REPORTING DEADLINE WHERE SOME
OF THE LARGER PROPERTIES HAD
REACHED THEIR DEADLINE YEARS
BEFORE WE EXTENDED THE
ENFORCEMENT DEADLINES FOR THE
ORDINANCE WHERE ENFORCEMENT
DEADLINE CAME ABOUT WAS AS THE
ORDINANCE ITSELF WAS PHASED IN
OVER SEVERAL YEARS AND NOT ALL
PROPERTIES WOULD EVEN HAVE
REACHED THEIR ENFORCEMENT
DEADLINE BY JUNE 1ST.
>> TWENTY TWENTY THREE
ENFORCEMENT WAS INTENDED TO
START AFTER ALL PROPERTIES HAD
BEEN PHASED IN SO AFTER JUNE
1ST TWENTY TWENTY FOUR SO WHAT
WE DECIDED TO DO WAS TO DELAY
ENFORCEMENT DEADLINES TO THE
DATES ON THE RATE.
THIS DID NOT CHANGE ANYTHING
REQUIRED ABOUT THE DATA
REQUIRED TO REPORT THAT ONE
HUNDRED AND FIFTY THOUSAND
SQUARE FOR PROPERTY STILL NEEDS
TO SUBMIT OR NEEDED TO SUBMIT
BY SEPTEMBER 1ST TWENTY TWENTY
FOR THEIR REPORT FOR TWENTY
TWENTY ONE TWENTY TWO AND
TWENTY TWENTY THREE DATA.
>> SO JUST THE DATE AFTER WHICH
ENFORCEMENT WOULD START IF
NECESSARY.
I'LL EMPHASIZE A COUPLE
OF TIMES IN THE PRESENTATION
THAT WHILE THERE ARE FINES IN
THE ORDINANCE AND WE COULD TAKE
ENFORCEMENT ACTION IF NECESSARY
IT'S NOT THE GOAL.
BENCHMARKING GIVES HELPFUL DATA
TO EVERYONE INVOLVED IN A
BUILDING AND THAT'S THE GOAL IF
NECESSARY WE CAN BUT IT'S NOT
THE GOAL AND SO FAR WE'VE
GOTTEN TO THE RIGHT PERSON AND
WALK THEM THROUGH WHAT THEY
NEED TO DO AT A PROPERTY.
THEY HAVE TAKEN THE STEPS TO
BENCHMARK WHETHER COMPLETE OR
IN THE PROCESS.
NOT ONLY FUNNY HOW PHRASE AT
PUBLIC BUILDINGS BUT CITY
PROPERTIES ALSO NEED TO COMPLY
WITH THE ORDINANCE SPECIFICALLY
BUILDINGS OR PROPERTIES IN THE
CITY OWNED BY THE CITY THAT ARE
TEN THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
OF ROSEVILLE AREA OR MORE AND
THEY ARE OWNED, LEASED OR
MANAGED BY THE CITY SUCH THAT
THE CITY REGULARLY PAYS ALL OR
PART OF THE ANNUAL ENERGY OR
WATER BILLS.
WHERE THAT ENDS UP IS THAT
SEVEN PROPERTIES ARE CURRENTLY
COVERED BY THE ORDINANCE.
THE PROPERTIES THAT ARE NOT ARE
EITHER OUTSIDE THE CITY LIKE
THE WHEELER SERVICE CENTER AND
NOT SUBJECT TO THE ORDINANCE OR
THEY'RE UNDER TEN THOUSAND
SQUARE FEET OF GROSS FLOOR AREA
OR IN THE CASE OF PARKING
STRUCTURES WE OWN THEM.
WE PAY NO UTILITY BILLS.
SO AT THE SEVEN PROPERTIES
COVERED HERE, SOME QUICK
RUNDOWN OF THEM THE SITE UI FOR
THESE PROPERTIES DECREASE FROM
TWENTY TWENTY ONE TO TWENTY
TWENTY TWO FOR TERMS E FIVE
JUST FOR THOSE LISTENING IS
ENERGY INTENSITY SO THE ENERGY
USED BY PROPERTY PER UNIT
OF AREA SQUARE IN THIS CASE
SITE UI IS THE ENERGY THAT IS
USED ON SITE.
SO THAT'S WHAT YOU'RE GOING TO
SEE ON YOUR ENERGY BILL SOURCE
LIFE FOR THESE PROPERTIES
INCREASED FROM TWENTY TWENTY
ONE TWENTY TO THIRTY TWO AND
THEN DECREASED FROM TWENTY
TWENTY TWO TO TWENTY TWENTY
THREE SOURCE THE UI IS AGAIN
ENERGY USE PER UNIT OF OF AREA
BUT THAT IS THE TOTAL AMOUNT
OF RAW FUEL THAT IS REQUIRED TO
OPERATE A PROPERTY AND NOT ONLY
INCLUDES ENERGY THAT'S USED ON
SITE BUT IT INCLUDES
TRANSMISSION LOSSES DURING
GENERATION TRANSMISSION
DISTRIBUTION OF ENERGY AND
ENERGY.
SA CONSIDERS TO BE A THE BEST
WAY TO LOOK AT A COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES PERFORMANCE ACROSS
THE BOARD.
SPEAKING OF CONVERSION FACTORS
ENERGY STAR HAS DIFFERENT
CONVERSION FACTORS NATIONALLY
THAT ARE USED TO DETERMINE THE
SOURCE ENERGY PERFORMANCE FOR
BENCHMARKING PROPERTIES SO SO
THAT'S THAT TOTAL GREENHOUSE
GAS GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION
INTENSITY THAT'S PRETTY
STRAIGHTFORWARD THAT DECREASE
IN TWENTY TWENTY ONE TO TWENTY
TWENTY TWO AND IT'S ABOUT THE
SAME FROM TWENTY TWENTY TWO TO
TWENTY TWENTY THREE.
>> LASTLY WATER USE INTENSITY
INCREASE FROM TWENTY TWENTY ONE
TO TWENTY TWENTY TWO AND THE
INCREASE FROM TWENTY TWENTY TWO
TO TWENTY TWENTY THREE WHILE
IT'S NOT REQUIRED BY THE
AUDIENCE WHAT WE SAY IS
ACTUALLY BENCHMARKING ALL CITY
PROPERTIES.
MOST OF THEM ARE ACTUALLY
MOSTLY BENCHMARKED BUT NOT
SUBJECT TO THE ORDINANCE NOT
INCLUDED IN THESE METRICS AND A
COUPLE OF THINGS MAYBE NEEDING
TO BE ADDRESSED IN THEIR
REPORTS
AS WE GO THROUGH THEM.
>> SO WE'RE WORKING ON THE REST
OF THEM EVEN THOUGH IT'S NOT
REQUIRED AND I'M HAPPY TO GIVE
UPDATES ON THAT IN THE FUTURE.
SO GETTING INTO THE MAIN
FINDINGS IN THE REPORT ITSELF
ALREADY COVERED THIS BUT AGAIN
CURRENTLY MULTIFAMILY
PROPERTIES ARE THE MOST COMMON
PROPERTY TYPE AND THEY TAKE UP
THE LARGEST GROSS AREA
OF PROPERTIES BENCHMARKING SO
FAR LOOKING AT PERFORMANCE THE
PROPERTY TYPES RIGHT NOW WITH
THE HIGHEST UI ARE AMBULATORY
SERVICE CENTERS, LABORATORIES
AND RESTAURANTS AND THE
PROPERTIES OF THE LOWEST UI ARE
PARKING GARAGES, NON
REFRIGERATED WAREHOUSES AND
OF WORSHIP FACILITIES.
OVERALL WE ARE SEEING THAT
LARGER PROPERTIES TEND TO HAVE
A LOWER UI BUT THAT IS MORE
LIKELY TO BE FROM THE PROPERTY
USE TYPE RATHER THAN INHERENT
IN LARGER PROPERTIES.
WHAT WE ARE SEEING IS THAT
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES ARE
DISPROPORTIONALLY LIKELY TO BE
THOSE PROPERTIES OVER ONE
HUNDRED THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
AND THEY ARE AS YOU CAN SEE ONE
OF THE LOWER USES IN TERMS
OF PROPERTY USE TYPES.
SO THAT'S MORE LIKELY TO BE
THAT RATHER THAN INHERENT IN
EVERY LARGER PROPERTY WE SEE
THE SAME TRENDS OF GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSIONS, THE SAME
PROPERTY TYPES AS IT COULD MAKE
SENSE ARE THE HIGHEST AND
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION
INTENSITIES WITH LABORATORIES,
RESTAURANTS AND AMBULATORY
SERVICE CENTERS BEING THE
HIGHEST NON-ALLERGIC WAREHOUSES
,WORSHIP FACILITIES AND
PARKING GARAGES BEING THE
LOWEST.
THINGS ARE DIFFERENT WITH
WATER.
THE PROPERTIES THE HIGHEST
WATER USE INTENSITY ARE FITNESS
CENTERS, HEALTH CLUBS AND GYMS
,HOTELS AND RESIDENCE HALLS
AND DORMITORIES.
I'LL NOTE HERE THAT THE
RESIDENCE HALL AND DORMITORY
PROPER USE TYPE DOES NOT
INCLUDE YOU EVENT PROPERTIES
HAVE IS NOT SUBJECT TO THE
ORDINANCE AS IS SO THIS WOULD
BE A NON UNIVERSITY OWNED
DORMITORY OR RESIDENCE HALL
PROPERTY.
THE PROPERTIES AT THE LOWEST
AUDIENCE INTENSITY ARE NOT
REFRIGERATED WAREHOUSES,
PARKING GARAGES AND THEN WHAT
COMES ACROSS AN ENERGY STAR AS
IN OTHER TECHNOLOGY SCIENCE USE
WHICH IS ESSENTIALLY A THE
SPECIFIC PROPERTY IS BASICALLY
A MANUFACTURER OFFICE.
IT'S NOT JUST AN OFFICE BUT
IT'S NOT A MANUFACTURING PLANT.
IT'S JUST KIND OF THIS WEIRD
OTHER MIDDLE ZONE THAT ENERGY
STAR DEFINED AS THE BEST USE
FOR IT.
>> WE ALSO LOOK AT THE PERCENT
OF ENERGY USE THE PROPERTIES
HAVE FROM ELECTRICITY WHEN
WE'RE LOOKING AT HOW PROPERTIES
ARE CHANGING THEIR ENERGY USE
AT THE AT THE PROPERTY OVERALL.
SO CURRENTLY THE PROPERTIES
WITH THE HIGHEST PERCENT
OF THEIR ENERGY USE FROM
ELECTRICITY ARE PARKING
GARAGES, LABORATORIES AND
HOTELS WITH THE PROPERTIES
OF THE LOWEST PERCENT OF ENERGY
USE FROM ELECTRICITY BEING K
THROUGH 12 SCHOOLS OR
FACILITIES AND RESIDENCE HALLS
AND DORMS.
I'LL NOTE HERE AS WELL THAT
THIS DOES NOT INCLUDE THE
NUMBER OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
WELL, THE NUMBER OF PUBLIC
SCHOOLS ARE BENCHMARKING ALL
OF THEIR PROPERTIES.
THEY ARE ALSO NOT SUBJECT TO
THE AUDIENCE LIKE YOU THEM SO
THEIR METRICS ARE NOT INCLUDED
HERE.
>> THESE WOULD BE PRIVATE K
THROUGH 12 SCHOOLS THAT ARE
COVERED BY THE ORDINANCE.
ALSO MAKE ONE NOTE THERE THAT
IF YOU'RE LOOKING IN THE
ORDINANCE THE ANN ARBOR OPEN
SCHOOL TECHNICALLY FALLS UNDER
A CITY COVERED PROPERTY SO IT
ISN'T ACTUALLY INCLUDED IN THE
CITY METRICS.
THE NUMBER OF PUBLIC SCHOOLS
BECAUSE THEY ARE BENCHMARKING
THEIR WHOLE PORTFOLIO
OF BUILDINGS AND LOOKING TO THE
IMPROVEMENTS THEY CAN.
WE ARE MAKING SURE THAT THEY
HAVE THE DATA NEEDED TO CREATE
THE REPORT BUT THEY ESSENTIALLY
OWN THEIR BENCHMARKING REPORT.
IT'S THIS WEIRD GRAY ZONE WHERE
PROPERTIES FALL FOR CITY
PROPERTIES MOVING OUT TO DATA
ACCURACY AND ACCESSIBILITY.
WE DO FIND THE DATA IS
GENERALLY ACCURATE ACROSS THE
UTILITIES THAT THE PROPERTIES
ARE USING WITH SOME VARIATIONS
AND EXACTLY HOW ACCURATE IT IS
AND THE ISSUES THAT ARE THERE
THAT AFFECT ACCURACY OVERALL
CONSTANTLY ENERGY AS THE MOST
ACCURATE DATA FOLLOWED BY THE
CITY WITH NO WATER AND THEN DTE
ENERGY DATA ON THE RIGHT YOU'LL
ACTUALLY SEE AN EXAMPLE FROM
DTRS DATA AUTOMATION PORTAL
OF WHAT IT LOOKS LIKE WHEN
PROPERTY COMES THROUGH WITH
ELECTRICITY LAPTOP COMPLETE AND
THEN IN THIS CASE GAS DATA
WHICH SEEMS TO BE INCOMPLETE.
BUT GET TO THIS IN A FUTURE IN
A COUPLE MORE SLIDES.
BUT THIS IS A FOCUS WE HAVE ON
ADDRESSING AND UNDERSTANDING
DATA ACCURACY ACROSS UTILITIES
WHEN WE RECEIVE DATA IN TERMS
OF ACCESSIBILITY DATA IS PRETTY
GENERALLY ACCESSIBILITY BUT HOW
EXACTLY ACCESSIBLE IT IS AND
HOW IT CAN BE ACCESSED DOES
VARY ACROSS UTILITIES.
>> FOR EXAMPLE, DC AND THE CITY
OF ANN ARBOR HAVE AUTOMATED
DATA AVAILABLE WHEREAS
CONSTELLATION ENERGY DOES NOT.
ON THE OTHER HAND DTRS
AUTOMATED DATA PORTAL CAN BE
TRICKY TO ENROLL IN AND WE MADE
A LOT WE PUT A LOT OF ENERGY
AND EFFORT INTO GETTING THE
CITY'S WATER AUTOMATION PROCESS
WHERE IT IS NOW WHICH IS GREAT
BUT IT WAS A LOT OF WORK TO GET
THERE.
CONSTELLATION ON THE OTHER HAND
DOES NOT HAVE ANY DATA
AUTOMATION BUT WE FOUND THAT
DATA IS VERY EASY TO OBTAIN AND
HIGH QUALITY.
SO WRAPPING UP WE ALSO FOUND
THE COMPLIANCE WAS IS AN ISSUE
AND IT IS A COMMON ISSUE.
IT IS A COMMON ISSUE FOR ALMOST
EVERY JURISDICTION THAT
IMPLEMENTS A BENCHMARKING
ORDINANCE.
FOR EXAMPLE, THE CITY
OF DETROIT RECENTLY PASSED
THEIR ORDINANCE AND IN THEIR
FIRST YEAR THEY HAD ABOUT A
TWENTY FOUR PERCENT COMPLIANCE
RATE BY NOVEMBER OF TWENTY
TWENTY FOR THE CITY
OF INDIANAPOLIS GOT TO ABOUT I
THINK TWENTY PERCENT IN THEIR
FIRST YEAR.
SO IT IS A COMMON ISSUE TO
COMMON ISSUE TO HAVE LOW
COMPLIANCE RATES ACROSS
JURISDICTIONS THAT HAVE THIS.
WE FOUND THAT IN INCREASING OUR
COMPLIANCE RATES ROBUST
REPEATED OUTREACH WAS ESSENTIAL
AND THAT DATA AUTOMATION WAS
ALSO HELPFUL.
THE LESS THE PROPERTIES NEED TO
DO, THE MORE LIKELY THEY ARE TO
COMPLY AND IT INCREASES THE
SUSTAINABILITY OF BENCHMARKING
WITHIN OWNERSHIP AND AN
ORGANIZATION DOING THAT
BENCHMARKING FOR PROPERTY
MOVING FORWARD WE ARE LOOKING
TO INCREASE COMPLIANCE,
INCREASE DATA ACCESS AND
ACCURACY AND TO BENCHMARK MORE
CITY COVER PROPERTIES THAN
THOSE REQUIRED BY THE ORDINANCE
.
WE ARE ALSO LOOKING TO DO EVEN
DEEPER DOVE TO THE DATA WE HAVE
SO THAT WHEN WE ARE BUILDING
FUTURE INITIATIVES FOR
COMMERCIAL AND MULTIFAMILY
HOUSING WE HAVE A BETTER IDEA
OF WHAT THE BENCHMARKING IT IS
TELLING US AS WE BUILD THOSE
INITIATIVES.
AND ON THE RIGHT HERE YOU SEE
AN ACTUAL BUILDING THAT IS
BENCHMARKING IN OUR PORTFOLIO
THAT HAD SIGNIFICANT
IMPROVEMENTS IN THEIR GAS USE
EFFICIENCY WHICH IS REFLECTED
IN JUST THE QUICK EASY CHART UP
TOP BUT THEN IN THE ACTUAL
METRICS FROM ENERGY ARE SEEING
OVER THAT ALMOST ONE YEAR
SIGNIFIER IN IMPROVEMENTS TO
THEIR ENERGY STAR SCORE THEIR
UI AND THEN IMPORTANTLY THE
COST OF THEIR ENERGY.
>> ALSO SEE WE SEE A DECREASE
SO COMPLIANCE RATES YES,
COMPLIANCE RATES INCREASED
ABOUT TENFOLD OVER THE COURSE
OF TWENTY TWENTY FOUR STARTING
OFF WE HAD ABOUT A THREE
PERCENT COMPLIANCE FOR TWENTY
TWENTY THREE AND ABOUT AN EIGHT
PERCENT COMPLIANCE RATE FOR
TWENTY TWENTY ONE AND AS YOU
CAN SEE THAT IS NOW LEVELING
OFF AT ABOUT THIRTY TWO PERCENT
AS OF WHEN THE REPORT WAS
CREATED I'LL SAY THIRTY TWO
PERCENT COMPLIANCE AND SEVENTY
EIGHT PERCENT COMPLIANCE FOR
TWENTY TWENTY ONE PARTICIPATION
RATES ARE UNSURPRISINGLY HIGHER
AGAIN THAT IS PROPERTIES WHO
HAVE STARTED BENCHMARKING AND
EITHER DON'T HAVE ALL THEIR
DATA FOR EXAMPLE DTT DOES AN
AUTOMATED DATA PUSH ONCE PER
MONTH.
WE'RE ACTUALLY GETTING THAT
THIS WEEK AS WE SPEAK FOR THIS
MONTH OR THEY MAY HAVE ALL
THEIR DATA BUT MAYBE THEY LOOK
EXTREMELY EFFICIENT FOR THAT
TYPE OF PROPERTY OR REALLY
INEFFICIENT AND WE WANT TO MAKE
SURE THAT THEIR DATA IS CORRECT
BEFORE WE MOVE THEM INTO
COMPLIANCE.
>> DIVING A LITTLE DEEPER TO
DATA ACCESSIBILITY GOING ONE BY
ONE D.T. IS OBVIOUSLY THE
LARGEST ENERGY UTILITY AT THE
MOMENT IN THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
ALMOST EVERY PROPERTY USES THEM
FOR ELECTRICITY IF NOT
ELECTRICITY OR GAS.
>> YOU CAN GET DATA IN
ESSENTIALLY FOUR WAYS FROM A
PROPERTY OWNER OR A MANAGER
COULD GET DATA FROM BILL'S
ISSUE WITH BILLS IS THAT ONE
IT'S ALL MANUAL.
IT'S A LOT OF WORK.
ALSO A PROPERTY MANAGER AND
OWNER USUALLY DOES NOT HAVE ALL
THE BILLS FOR A PROPERTY SO
IT'S NOT GOING TO CAPTURE
TENANT DATA AND THAT MEANS IT'S
AN INCOMPLETE REPORT.
YOU CAN ALSO DIRECTLY REQUEST
YOUR DATA FROM DTI BY EMAIL
WITH A FORM ALSO MANUAL ALSO
THAT DATA I ACTUALLY DON'T KNOW
ANY PROPERTY IS CHOSEN THAT OUT
THERE JUST OTHER WAYS TO DO IT
AND BETTER WAYS TO DO IT.
IT ALSO IS LIKELY NOT TO GIVE
LET'S SAY FOR ONE HUNDRED AND
FIFTY THOUSAND PRIVATE PROPERTY
IT PROBABLY WON'T ACTUALLY GIVE
THEM DATA BACK TO TWENTY TWENTY
ONE.
SO NOT RECOMMEND RECOMMENDED
PROCESS A PROPERTY OWNER COULD
ACTUALLY USE THEIR LANDLORD
PORTAL ONLINE THROUGH GTE AND
THAT WOULD USUALLY ACTUALLY GET
THEM THEIR TENANT DATA AS WELL.
BUT IT ALSO USUALLY DOESN'T GO
BACK TO TWENTY TWENTY ONE LIKE
SOME PROPERTIES NEED.
>> SO THE RECOMMENDED WAY TO
GET DATA FROM DUTY IS TO USE
THEIR ENERGY DATA HUB WHICH IS
A AUTOMATED DATA PORTAL THEY'VE
SET UP WHICH PROVIDES
AGGREGATED BUILDING LEVEL DATA
FOR BENCHMARKING PROPERTIES AND
IT CONNECTS TO ENERGY STAR
PORTFOLIO MANAGER.
SO WHEN IT CONNECTS IT WILL
AUTOMATICALLY UPLOAD DATA INTO
ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO MANAGER
INTO THE FUTURE SIGNIFICANT
REDUCING THE AMOUNT OF WORK
REQUIRED TO COMPLY.
THAT SAID, IT IS A LITTLE
TRICKY TO ENROLL IN IT
SOMETIMES IF THE PERSON
BENCHMARKING IS NOT THE PERSON
WHO HAS ACCESS TO THE ONLINE
ACCOUNT AND OR IS NOT AN
AUTHORIZED USER ON THE LANDLORD
PORTAL, IT CAN BE TRICKY TO GET
THAT WORKED OUT JUST TO GET THE
FORM SIGNED AND ENROLLED.
>> THAT SAID, THE PORTAL ITSELF
IS EXCELLENT AND IS A REAL HELP
TO A LOT OF BUILDINGS DOING
THAT AND IS WORKING ON A SLIGHT
EASING OF THE PROCESS TO DO
THAT ENROLLMENT.
THE OTHER BARRIER IS THAT HAS
KEPT THE DATA HUB IN A PILOT
PHASE DUE TO THE COST
OF RUNNING IT AT SCALE FOR THE
ENTIRE SERVICE AREA.
SO PROPERTIES ENROLLING IN THE
DATA HUB JUST NEED TO JOIN THE
ANN ARBOR WASHTENAW TWENTY
THIRTY DISTRICT TO ENROLL IN
THE HUB.
IT IS FREE TO JOIN AND THE
DISTRICT OFFERS FREE SUPPORT
FOR BENCHMARKING WORKING
THROUGH THE ENROLLMENT PROCESS,
SUBMITTING THE REPORT TO THE
CITY AND SOLVING ANYTHING WITH
THE REPORT THEY MAY NEED TO BE
FIXED AFTER THE REPORT
SUBMITTED SO IT IS COMPLETELY
FREE TO JOIN FREE SUPPORT BUT
IT IS ANOTHER STEP TO GET TO
THE THE DATA FOR DUTY
CONSTELLATION IS THE A CHOICE
ENERGY PROVIDER AND IS THE ONLY
ONE I'VE ENCOUNTERED IN ANN
ARBOR SO FAR.
THEY MAINLY PROVIDE GAS DATA
THERE IS A COUPLE OF PROPERTIES
THAT HAVE ELECTRIC DATA FROM
THEM FROM CONSTELLATION AGAIN
YOU CAN USE YOUR BILLS TO GET
DATA BUT THAT DOES NOT ALWAYS
CAPTURE ALL OF PROPERTIES USAGE
IF THERE IS TENANTS WHO HAVE
THEIR OWN SEPARATE ACCOUNTS.
CONVERSELY FROM DUTY YOU CAN
ACTUALLY REQUEST YOUR DATA
DIRECTLY FROM ISOLATION FROM A
REPRESENTATIVE AND IT IS
ACTUALLY VERY QUICK AND EASY TO
DO IT AND IT COMES IN A VERY
DIGESTIBLE FORMAT TO THEN RE
UPLOAD TO
ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO
MANAGER.
YOU CAN ALSO DOWNLOAD DATA FROM
CONSTELLATION IN YOUR ONLINE
ACCOUNT THAT KIND OF LIKE THE
BILLS YOU MAY NOT GET ALL YOUR
TENANT DATA.
SO DEPENDING ON HOW A PROPERTY
IS STRUCTURED AND THEIR
METERING AND ONLINE ACCOUNT OR
DIRECT REQUESTS TO
CONSTELLATION USUALLY ARE
PRETTY GOOD.
>> WE IT WOULD BE NICE FOR
CONSTELLATION TO ADD DATA
AUTOMATION.
>> THERE ARE BENEFITS TO IT FOR
THE LONGEVITY OF BENCHMARKING
BUT SO FAR IT'S NOT BEEN A
BARRIER TO PROPERTY IS GETTING
THEIR DATA FROM CONSTELLATION
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR WATER.
WE ARE THE SOLE WATER UTILITY
IN THE CITY AND YOU CAN GET IT
AGAIN YOUR DATA FROM BILL'S
SAME ISSUE DEPENDING ON THE
PROPERTY YOU MAY NOT HAVE ALL
THE BILLS FOR THE USAGE.
YOU CAN ALSO USE O'CLOCK SOME
OF YOU MAY BE FAMILIAR WITH
ALCOHOL IS WAS ACTUALLY
LAUNCHED BEFORE THE
BENCHMARKING ORDINANCE WAS
IMPLEMENTED AND IT IS A WATER
DATA DASHBOARD THAT WATER
UTILITY CUSTOMER CAN ACCESS TO
SEE PRETTY GRANULAR DATA DOWN
TO THE HOUR FOUR METERS IF YOU
WANT TO YOU CAN DOWNLOAD USAGE
FROM ALCOHOLIC ALSO IN A PRETTY
DIGESTIBLE FORMAT TO RE UPLOAD
ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO MANAGER.
BUT THE RECOMMENDED PROCESS WE
HAVE TO USE OUR DATA AUTOMATION
PROCESS WE'VE SET UP ITS A LOT
OF WORK ON THE BACK END FOR A
PROPERTY.
IT'S BASICALLY SETTING UP YOUR
PROPERTY AND ENERGY STAR
SETTING UP YOUR METER PROFILES,
CONNECTING WITH A CITY MANAGED
ACCOUNT AND THEN OUR CITY
MANAGED ACCOUNT THROUGH AN API
CREATED BY OUR IT TEAM AND
CUSTOMER SERVICE PUSHES METER
BY METER WATER MONTH BY MONTH
FOR EVERY METER LINKED TO IT
TOOK A LOT OF WORK ON THE BACK
END TO GET THAT TO WHERE IT IS
NOW BUT IT WORKS VERY, VERY
WELL SINCE THE RECOMMENDED
PROCESS FOR THAT IN TERMS
OF DATA ACCURACY IS GENERALLY
PRETTY ACCURATE.
MOST PROPERTIES HAVE A GAP HERE
AND THERE NOTHING THOUGH OFTEN
SOMETHING THAT WOULDN'T AFFECT
THE REPORT TOO MUCH.
BUT THERE IS A SMALL SUBSET
OF PROPERTIES THAT HAVE HAD
MORE SEVERE ISSUES LIKE ONE
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY THAT HAD
HUNDREDS OF GAPS SMALL BUT
HUNDREDS OF ANOTHER PROPERTY
THAT HAD ONE BIG GAP OF TWO
YEARS FOR HALF OF THE PROPERTY
.
THOSE ARE PRETTY RARE BUT THE
BIGGER ISSUE WE'RE FINDING IS
ONE PROPERTIES HAVE THESE SMALL
GAPS IS WHEN IT'S PRESENTED AS
IT WAS IN THAT SLIDE THAT HAD
THE THE GAPS IN THE DATA IF
IT'S A MULTIFAMILY PROPERTY
WHERE THE UNIT HAS A GAP OF ONE
MONTH IN THE SUMMER AND THEY
HAVE GASSY AND IT'S VACANT AND
THE AC ISN'T RUNNING, THAT
MIGHT NOT BE A GAP THAT MAY BE
NO USAGE IS COMING THROUGH IS A
GAP BUT IF IT'S THREE MONTHS IN
THE WINTER THAT'S UNLIKELY TO
BE THAT.
SO HOW HOW CAN WE UNDERSTAND
THAT BETTER WHEN THIS HAPPENS
SO WORKING WITH DUTY TO BETTER
UNDERSTAND THAT WHEN IT COMES
THROUGH?
THAT SAID, IT IS RARE AND IN
THE CASE OF THAT THAT PROPERTY
WITH EXTENDED GAP OF TWO YEARS
IT TOOK A FEW MONTHS TO FIX BUT
THEY KEPT ON IT WITH US FOR
FOUR MONTHS AND IT IS NOW
ALMOST COMPLETELY FIXED ALMOST
ALL THE DATA HAS BEEN HAS BEEN
CORRECTED SO I CAN'T TAKE TIME
BUT IT DOES WORK WITH US TO
RESOLVE THAT.
I'LL NOTE THAT THE DATA HUB HAS
TWO DEDICATED STAFF WHO RUN IT
SO IT'S IT IS HELPFUL TO HAVE
TWO SPECIFIC PEOPLE WE WORK
WITH ON THIS FOR CONSOLATION
ENERGY.
WE FIND THAT THEY ARE GENERALLY
VERY ACCURATE.
IT'S PRETTY RARE TO HAVE ANY
GAPS AT ALL AND IF THERE IS ANY
IT'S USUALLY ONE OR TWO VERY
SHORT JUST SOME METER ISSUE AND
IT SKIPS IT READ THE WORST
EXAMPLE WE FOUND WAS A PROPERTY
THAT HAD NO GAS USAGE FOR
SEVERAL YEARS AND IT WAS JUST A
PHYSICAL METER ISSUE WITH HOW
CONSTELLATION USES THEIR
ENERGY.
IT ACTUALLY WAS A METER SO WE
WORKED WITH CONSTELLATION ADT
TO FIX THAT METER AND NOW IT'S
GETTING READINGS.
SO ONE BENEFIT PRACTICALLY A
BENCHMARKING THEIR ONE THING WE
I DON'T KNOW HOW IMPACTFUL IT
IS BUT CERTAINLY PLAYS A FACTOR
IS THAT PROPERTIES HAVE MUCH
FEWER CONSTELLATION METERS SO
THAT PROPERTY THAT HAD HUNDREDS
OF GAPS IN THE METERS OVER TWO
HUNDRED INDIVIDUAL ELECTRIC
METERS AND ONE CONSOLATION
METER AND ONE CANCELATION FOR
THE WHOLE PROPERTY AS AN
EXAMPLE, CITY OF ANN ARBOR
WATER DATA TOUCHED ON A BIT
THAT IS GENERALLY VERY ACCURATE
AND CAN BE VERY GRANULAR
ESPECIALLY IF YOU'RE USING YOUR
PORTAL.
WE FIND THAT ALMOST EVERY GAP
IN THAT DATA IS DUE TO A METER
OR METER TRANSMISSION UNIT
BEING REPLACED.
SO IF A METER BREAKS AND IT
NEEDS TO BE REPLACED THAT WILL
RESULT IN THE GAP IN DATA.
>> IT'S USUALLY PRETTY SHORT.
IT CAN BE LONGER IF THERE'S
SOMETHING LIKE A CABLE NEEDS TO
BE PROCURED THAT IS BACKWARD OR
SOMEWHERE SOMETHING LIKE THAT.
THE MAIN DIFFERENCE BETWEEN THE
GAPS THAT WE SEE WITH WATER
DATA VERSUS DATA WE SEE ON THE
ENERGY SIDE SOMETIMES IS THAT
WE CAN ALMOST ALWAYS EXPLAIN
WHAT THE GAP IS ONE BECAUSE
IT'S PRETTY RELIABLY SOME KIND
OF EQUIPMENT RELATED ISSUE AND
BECAUSE WE ARE THE CITY AND IT
IS ANOTHER AREA OF OUR
ORGANIZATION IT'S EASIER FOR US
TO WORK THROUGH AND FIND THOSE
ISSUES THAN WORKING THROUGH
MULTIPLE LAYERS OF A SEPARATE
ORGANIZATION.
SO WRAPPING UP WITH SOME TRENDS
AS OF NOW THE TRENDS THAT WE'RE
SEEING RIGHT NOW LOOKING AT
TWENTY TWENTY ONE TO TWENTY
TWENTY THREE DATA ARE UP FRONT.
THEY'RE JUST NOT REPRESENTATIVE
OF THE OVERALL BUILDING
PERFORMANCE IN THE CITY.
REASON FOR THAT BEING IS THAT
AS THE AUDIENCE FAIZAN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE HAS ONLY BUILDINGS
OVER TEN ONE HUNDRED SQUARE
FEET WHEREAS TWENTY TWENTY
THREE HAS BUILDINGS THAT ARE
TWENTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET OR
HIGHER SO THE TYPES
OF PROPERTIES THE SIZES WHAT
THEY ARE IS JUST DIFFERENT
ACROSS THERE.
SO WHAT WE'RE GOING TO BE
LOOKING AT FOR SURE IS WHEN WE
GET TWENTY TWENTY FOUR DATA
THAT'S GOING TO BE MORE APPLES
TO APPLES WITH TWENTY TWENTY
THREE DATA TO LOOK AT ACTUAL
TRENDS ACROSS THE WHOLE
PORTFOLIO OVERALL.
THAT SAID, WHAT WE'RE SEEING SO
FAR IS THAT AS I MENTIONED
EARLIER, LARGER PROPERTIES TEND
TO HAVE LOWER ELIS AND
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION
INTENSITIES AND TEND TO HAVE
HIGHER WATER USE INTENSITY
WHICH IS MORE LIKELY TO BE
BECAUSE OF THE PROPERTY TYPES
AT THOSE SIZES OF PROPERTIES
THAT'S SORT OF IN THOSE
COMPLIANCE YEARS SITE AND
SOURCE UI INCREASE IN TWENTY
TWENTY ONE TO TWENTY TWENTY
THREE AGAIN MORE LIKELY TO BE
FROM THE TYPES OF PROPERTIES
BEING PHASED IN THERE RATHER
THAN THE OVERALL IN OUR
BUILDINGS INCREASING OR
DECREASING THEIR EFFICIENCY
OVER THAT TIME WE ACTUALLY SEE
THOUGH THAT GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSION INTENSITY INCREASE
FROM TWENTY TWENTY ONE TO
TWENTY TWENTY TWO BUT SLIGHTLY
DECREASED FROM TWENTY TWENTY
TWO TO TWENTY TWENTY THREE AND
THEN SIMILARLY WATER USE
INTENSITY INCREASED FROM TWENTY
TWENTY ONE TO TWENTY TWENTY TWO
AND THEN DECREASE FROM TWENTY
TWENTY TWO TO TWENTY TWENTY
THREE.
>> SO WRAPPING UP WITH THAT
WE'RE GOING TO BE LOOKING WHEN
WE HAVE TWENTY THREE MORE
APPLES TO APPLES ONWARD SEE
REALLY WHAT THOSE TRENDS START
TO LOOK WITH MORE FAIRLY
COMPARED PROPERTY PORTFOLIOS
OVERALL AND WITH THAT I WILL
TAKE ANY QUESTIONS YOU HAVE ON
THE PRESENTATION OR REPORT.
THANK YOU CONOR IS REALLY
ENCOURAGING TO PARTICULARLY SEE
THE CONTOURS OF THE PROGRAM
LAID OUT AND I THINK I
PARTICULARLY APPRECIATED THE
GRANULARITY AND THE DETAILS ON
THE DATA ACQUISITION QUALITY
OVERALL I WOULD I WOULD JUST
SORT OF FOR SOME QUESTIONS JUST
SOME THINGS TO THINK ABOUT ALSO
IS FOR THE COMMISSION WHAT BOTH
IN TERMS OF THE TRENDS THAT ARE
PRESENTED AS FAR AS THE
BENCHMARKING ALSO I THINK ONE
OF THE THINGS THAT WOULD BE
HELPFUL FOR THE COMMISSION TO
THINK ABOUT IS SORT OF WHAT ARE
THE SOME OF THE TAKEAWAYS AND
HOW DO WE SORT OF LOOK AT WHAT
THE REPORT IN THE PRESENTATION
SUGGESTS IN TERMS OF PRIORITIES
AS A RESULT.
SO JUST JUST AS A WAY
OF FRAMING THAT A LITTLE BIT
MORE TO SO I'LL OPEN IT UP FOR
QUESTIONS FROM COMMISSION
MEMBERS
.
COUNCIL MEMBER YEAH.
APOLOGIES COMING IN LATE.
I JUST A POINT
OF CLARIFICATION.
THE RESIDENT HALLS AND
DORMITORIES IS THAT SORORITIES
AND FRATERNITIES IS THAT
PRIMARILY THAT IS OR I DON'T
WANT TO SO SPECIFICALLY THAT
ONE THING I ALSO KNOW WITH THAT
IS THAT SOME PROPERTY USERS
THUS FAR MAY ONLY HAVE ONE, TWO
OR THREE PROPERTIES IN THERE SO
IT COULD BE ONE PROPERTY IN
THAT TYPE.
>> I'LL SAY THAT I THINK THAT
ONE IS A IT IS ACTUALLY NOT A
FRATERNITY OR SORORITY HOUSE.
IT IS A NONPROFIT STUDENT
HOUSING COOPERATIVE OF SOME
TYPE FOR THAT.
A LOT OF THE FRATERNITY
SORORITY HOUSES OFF THE TOP
OF MY HEAD ARE JUST JUST UNDER
THE SQUARE FOOTAGE FOR TWENTY
THOUSAND.
>> YES.
YEAH, I HAD A QUESTION THANKS
FOR THE PRESENTATION.
FIRST OF ALL, VERY INFORMATIVE
IF YOU'VE LOOKED AT SORT
OF LIKE HOW THINGS LIKE
TEMPERATURE DURING THE WINTER,
HOW THAT COMPARED OVER THOSE
YEARS WE'RE LOOKING AT A
DECLINE IN ENERGY USE
POTENTIALLY CURIOUS HOW
SEASONAL WEATHER MAY HAVE
AFFECTED THAT ALSO MAY WITH
WATER USE ESPECIALLY IT WOULD
BE INTERESTING TO SEE LIKE
WATER USE IN THE SUMMER VERSUS
WINTER AND HOW MUCH WATER LIKE
HOW WAS IT LIKE A DROUGHT YEAR
SO WE USED MORE WATER.
JUST HOW THAT AFFECTS THE
OVERALL TRENDS YEAR HERE.
>> THAT'S A GOOD QUESTION FOR
ENERGY FOR SURE.
WHAT THE UI THAT WE ARE USING
IS ENERGY STAR USES REGIONAL
WEATHER DATA TO DO A WEATHER
NORMALIZED UI SO IT TAKES THOSE
THAT WEATHER INTO ACCOUNT YEAR
TO YEAR.
SO IT'S MORE APPLES TO APPLES
ACROSS YEAR TO YEAR.
I DON'T KNOW THAT THERE'S
ANYTHING LIKE THAT FOR WATER
DATA THAT SAID WHEN GETTING IN
THE NITTY GRITTY
OF BENCHMARKING WHEN WE DO
WATER BENCHMARKING WE DO
SEPARATE OUT METER BY METER AND
ENERGY STAR AND IT'S LABELED
GENERALLY AS SUCH OF INDOOR
OUTDOOR SPRINKLERS.
SO ON.
SO ONE EXAMPLE OF WHAT THE ANN
ARBOR WASHED-OUT 20 30 DISTRICT
IS TRYING TO DO WITH THEIR
PROPERTIES IS IF THEY HAVE
SPRINKLERS OR IRRIGATION IS
LOOK AT THAT USAGE SEPARATED
OUT.
HOW MUCH COULD YOU SAVE ON
WATER AND POTENTIALLY BILLS
LOOKING AT THINGS THAT YOU USE
IN THE SUMMER THAT YOU MAY NEED
TO USE IN THE SUMMER AND REALLY
DIVING INTO THAT DIFFERENT
USAGE SEASONALLY IF THAT IF
THAT ANSWERS THAT QUESTION
WHICHEVER TO WORK WITH.
>> I THINK YOU'RE WELL FIRST
OF ALL, THANK YOU FOR THIS
WONDERFUL PRESENTATION AND I
WANT TO GIVE CONGRATULATIONS TO
THE CITY OF ANN ARBOR
AND THE
OFFICE OF SUSTAINABILITY FOR
IMPLEMENTING THIS.
IT'S REMARKABLE TO THINK ABOUT
THEIR YOU KNOW, HUGE CITIES ALL
ACROSS THE COUNTRY DOING
BENCHMARKING BUT IN EVER TO MY
KNOWLEDGE IS THE FIRST ONE IN
MICHIGAN MAYBE PAVE THE WAY FOR
DETROIT, YOU KNOW, ADOPTING
THEIR ORDINANCE IN 2023 AND
STARTING ON THEIR PROGRAM AND
I'VE HEARD RUMORS THAT GRAND
RAPIDS IS EXPLORING THIS AND
MAYBE EVEN LANSING.
SO I JUST WANT TO SAY THANK YOU
AND KUDOS TO START OFF A COUPLE
OF COMMENTS AND QUESTIONS.
SO FIRST COMMENT NOTICING THE
DATA TRENDS FROM 2001 TO 2003,
ONE OF THE THOUGHTS I HAD AS
WELL WAS THAT MAYBE ONE OF THE
REASONS FOR THE INCREASE IS
THAT, YOU KNOW, IN 2020 WE HAD
THIS PANDEMIC IN TWENTY ONE.
WE WERE NOT REALLY STILL OUT
OF IT YET.
AND SO I THINK JUST A LOT MORE
PEOPLE WERE IN BUILDINGS OF THE
COMMERCIAL SCALE VERSUS
RESIDENTIAL OVER TIME, YOU
KNOW, DURING THE PERIOD THAT'S
MAPPED HERE.
SO I WOULDN'T AT TOO BENT OUT
OF SHAPE ABOUT IT.
THAT SEEMS LIKE A PRETTY
UNDERSTANDABLE TREND.
AND THEN I HAD A QUESTION SO
YOU MENTIONED FIRST OF ALL THE
PROPERTIES ARE NOT SUBJECT TO
THIS AND JUST TALK TO THE DORM
RESIDENTS SIDE OF IT.
YOU MENTIONED THE SAME THING
ABOUT THE NUMBER OF PUBLIC
SCHOOLS THAT THEY ARE NOT PART
OF THIS.
THEY DO THEIR OWN BENCHMARKING
BUT YOU GUYS HELP AND SUPPORT.
>> BUT YOU DID SAY THERE WERE
OTHER LIKE K THROUGH 12 SCHOOLS
IN THE PORTFOLIO.
CAN YOU JUST HELP ME UNDERSTAND
WHAT LIKE WHAT ARE THOSE.
>> YEAH, SO WE I'LL BE UPFRONT
THAT WE ARE WAITING FOR A FINAL
LEGAL TAKE ON INDIVIDUAL
PROPERTY REPORT DISCLOSURE ON
EXACTLY WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE.
SO I TRY NOT TO IDENTIFY THE
BUILDINGS BY NAME.
I WOULD ALSO BE HAPPY TO FOLLOW
UP AFTERWARDS WITH A LITTLE
MORE INFORMATION ON THAT BUT
THEY ARE ONE EXAMPLE OF WHAT IT
COULD BE IS A A LET'S SAY A K
THROUGH 12 PROPERTY USED AT
LET'S SAY A RELIGIOUS
INSTITUTION HAS THAT AS WELL.
THAT COULD BE AN EXAMPLE
OF WHAT THAT IS THAT DOESN'T
FALL UNDER THE PUBLIC SCHOOLS.
>> THAT'S ACTUALLY NOT WHAT
THOSE ARE.
BUT WITHOUT IDENTIFYING THEM
THAT'S AN EXAMPLE.
IT'S IT IS NOT NECESSARILY EVEN
WHAT IT IS WHAT THE BUSINESS IS
BUT EVEN IN A SPECIFIC PROPERTY
PROPERTY USED COULD BE DIVIDED
BY SPACE IN THAT PROPERTY SO
THAT THAT'S AN EXAMPLE OF WHAT
THAT COULD LOOK LIKE WITHOUT IT
BEING AN ANN ARBOR PUBLIC
SCHOOL PROPERTY STILL BEING A K
THROUGH 12 INSTITUTION FOR
EXAMPLE.
>> THAT'S A REALLY HELPFUL
>> THANK YOU.
EXAMPLE.
AND I'LL SAY ON THE SITE SAY TO
>> THANK YOU.
YOU INCREASING AGAIN IT'S MORE
AND I'LL SAY ON THE SITE SAY TO
LIKELY TO BE THE PROPERTY IS
YOU INCREASING AGAIN IT'S MORE
PHASING IN BUT IN TERMS OF THE
LIKELY TO BE THE PROPERTY IS
PANDEMIC PERFORMANCE
PHASING IN BUT IN TERMS OF THE
SPECIFICALLY THAT OFFICE
PANDEMIC PERFORMANCE
PROPERTY IS THAT'S SOMETHING
SPECIFICALLY THAT OFFICE
THAT I'M INTERESTED IN AND I
PROPERTY IS THAT'S SOMETHING
KNOW WE RECEIVED A QUESTION IN
THAT I'M INTERESTED IN AND I
ADVANCE ABOUT YOU KNOW, ARE
KNOW WE RECEIVED A QUESTION IN
THERE OTHER METRICS THAT ARE BE
ADVANCE ABOUT YOU KNOW, ARE
HELPFUL TO LOOK AT OR IS THIS
THERE OTHER METRICS THAT ARE BE
ALL WE'RE LOOKING AT?
HELPFUL TO LOOK AT OR IS THIS
AND THIS IS THIS IS NOT THE
ALL WE'RE LOOKING AT?
ONLY METRICS WE'LL BE LOOKING
AND THIS IS THIS IS NOT THE
AT.
ONLY METRICS WE'LL BE LOOKING
WE WILL BE LOOKING AT ALL SORTS
AT.
OF METRICS, ESPECIALLY AS WE
WE WILL BE LOOKING AT ALL SORTS
LOOK TO FUTURE INITIATIVES THAT
OF METRICS, ESPECIALLY AS WE
THIS DATA COULD BE HELPFUL FOR.
LOOK TO FUTURE INITIATIVES THAT
SO THESE ARE TOPLINE NUMBERS IN
THIS DATA COULD BE HELPFUL FOR.
THE REPORT OVERALL PERFORMANCE
SO THESE ARE TOPLINE NUMBERS IN
ESPECIALLY WITH THIS BEING THE
THE REPORT OVERALL PERFORMANCE
FIRST REPORT THIS YEAR.
ESPECIALLY WITH THIS BEING THE
BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT I'VE
FIRST REPORT THIS YEAR.
BEEN THINKING ABOUT WHEN WE'RE
BUT IT IS SOMETHING THAT I'VE
LOOKING AT SOME OF THESE TRENDS
BEEN THINKING ABOUT WHEN WE'RE
LIKE OFFICE PROPERTIES, DO WE
LOOKING AT SOME OF THESE TRENDS
SEE A BIG INCREASE OR ARE NOT
LIKE OFFICE PROPERTIES, DO WE
ABSOLUTELY
KIND?
>> GOOD TO MEET YOU ALSO FELLOW
COMMISSIONERS GOOD TO SEE YOU
IN THE FLESH.
I DON'T THINK I'VE EVER
ACTUALLY SEEN EVEN JOE IN THE
FLESH BEFORE.
>> SO IT'S IT'S REALLY NICE TO
BE TOGETHER AND SEE PEOPLE.
>> THANKS FOR YOUR
PRESENTATION.
>> REALLY GOOD.
I'M REALLY HAPPY TO SEE THIS
GOING AND I'D LIKE TO START OUT
WITH AN ADDITIONAL COMPLIMENT.
>> I REACHED OUT TO JOHN
CULBERTSON WHO I'VE KNOWN AS A
FRIEND SINCE HIGH SCHOOL.
>> I WON'T SAY SINCE WHEN THAT
IS BUT IT'S A LONG TIME AND I
HAD A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS AND
I'LL READ YOU HER VERY FIRST
STATEMENT.
CONOR IS DOING A GREAT JOB
ENCOURAGING AND SUPPORTING
PEOPLE TO COMPLY WITH THE
ORDINANCE.
>> SO THANKS VERY MUCH.
>> I THINK MOST OF YOU KNOW JAN
IS THE THE LEAD OF THE TWENTY
THIRTY DISTRICT AND SO I REALLY
APPRECIATE YOU WORKING TOGETHER
WITH THE DISTRICT AND WITH ALL
THESE OTHER ENTITIES TO GET
THIS GOING.
>> I HAVE A COUPLE OF COMMENTS
QUESTIONS.
>> FIRST OF ALL, I HAVE TO
ADMIT I ONLY LOOKED AT THE THE
SLIDE SHOW AND I DIDN'T LOOK AT
THE SIXTY SIX PAGE REPORT AND I
DON'T KNOW IF I'LL DO THAT BUT
A COUPLE OF QUESTIONS.
>> CONCORD UNIVERSITY DOES IT
APPLY TO THEM AND ARE THEY
PARTICIPATING AND ARE THEY
COMPLYING?
IT BECAUSE THAT'S OBVIOUSLY A
LARGE LARGE ENTITY FIRST I'M
TAKING NOTES ON MY COMPUTER
SUPPORT IN MY TYPING.
THAT'S FINE.
SECONDLY I CAN ANSWER QUESTIONS
ONE AT A TIME OR ALL AT ONCE
WHATEVER YOU PREFER ONCE YOU
GO.
>> I DON'T WANT TO DO THAT
BECAUSE THEY MAY NOT BE
COMPLETED ALL THAT MUCH.
SO CONCORDAT UNIVERSITY
SPECIFICALLY THIS GETS INTO THE
ORDINANCES DEFINITIONS FOR
COVERED PROPERTIES AND THE
EXEMPTIONS FOR SPACES THAT DO
NOT HAVE TRADITIONAL COMMERCIAL
LEASES OR RENTALS IN SPACES
CONCORDIA DOES NOT ACTUALLY
HAVE ANYTHING LEASED AND WHILE
THEY DO HAVE DORMITORY
RESIDENCES THOSE ARE LEGAL
UNDERSTANDING WELL THROUGH
LEGAL DECISION IS NOT ACTUALLY
COVERED BY THE ORDINANCE.
>> SO CONCORDIA DOES NOT HAVE
TO BENCHMARK THEIR PROPERTIES.
>> OK, YEAH GOOD TO KNOW IN
TERMS OF COMPLIANCE I'M
DISAPPOINTED IN OUR LANDLORDS
AND OWNER BUILDING OWNERS.
I MEAN I ASSUME THAT IF THE
CITY SENDS OUT A PROPERTY TAX
NOTICE THEN THE COMPLIANCE IS
PRETTY HIGH AND JAN WENT
THROUGH A WHOLE BUNCH OF ISSUES
AS YOU MENTIONED THAT HAVE BEEN
PROBLEMATIC IN TERMS OF GETTING
PARTICIPATION AND COMPLIANCE
RATES UP.
>> WHY WHY WHY IS IT SO HARD TO
GET PEOPLE TO COMPLY?
>> YEAH, SO WITHOUT SPECULATING
TOO MUCH AND ALSO CAVEATING
THAT A LOT OF BEFORE MY TIME I
DON'T HAVE A LOT OF INSIGHTS IN
TO BUT WHAT WE'RE WHAT I'M
FINDING FROM MY EXPERIENCE IS
THAT WELL ONE ON THE TAX BILLS,
THE BENCHMARKING IS NOT NOTED
ON THE TAX BILLS IT'S ACTUALLY
SOMETHING WELL ACTUALLY I'LL
TAKE A STEP BACK AND SAY THAT
THE TWENTY THIRTY DISTRICT WE
ACTUALLY HAVE A CONTRACT WITH
THEM FOR SUPPORT AND THEY DO A
TREMENDOUS JOB.
THEY SUPPORT US THROUGH AND
PROPERTIES THROUGH EVERY STEP
OF BENCHMARKING AND I
APPRECIATE ALL THE KIND WORDS
THAT THEY'VE DONE A LOT OF WORK
AS WELL SUPPORTING ME WITH THIS
WHEN WE HAVE BEEN DOING
OUTREACH TO PROPERTIES
SURPRISINGLY A LOT
OF PROPERTIES HAVE NOT HEARD
ABOUT THIS WHEN I GIVE THEM A
CALL EVEN SOME WHO SPOKESMAN
BENCHMARKING FOR A FEW YEARS
AND I THINK THERE'S A NUMBER
OF THINGS THAT GO TO THAT
INCLUDING NITTY GRITTY WE SENT
POSTCARDS THIS YEAR TO BUILDING
OWNER ADDRESSES TO THE OWNERS
THEMSELVES AND THAT GOT A LOT
OF PEOPLE WHO GOT BACK TO US
AND IT WAS THE FIRST YEAR WE
DID THAT SO GOING INTO THE
ROBUST OUTREACH, DIVERSE
OUTREACH METHODS HAVE BEEN
HELPFUL CALL EMAIL PROPERTY
MANAGERS, OWNERS, POSTCARDS.
I'VE EVEN CALLED TENANTS
SOMETIMES LIKE HEY, CAN YOU
PASS THIS MESSAGE TO YOUR TO
YOUR OWNER?
>> I'M HAVING TROUBLE GETTING
HOLD OF HIM AND IT'S AND IT'S
WORKED SO DOING THAT REPEATEDLY
BUT ALSO IN DIVERSE WAYS WE
FOUND THAT SOME PROPERTIES JUST
NEED TO BE CONTACTED
DIFFERENTLY AND THEY JUST
HAVEN'T HEARD ABOUT IT FRANKLY
IT'S BEEN A FEW YEARS THEY'VE
HAD TURNOVER AS WELL.
SO ONE THING AS WE'RE NOT ONLY
INCREASING COMPLIANCE RATES,
IT'S THINKING ABOUT HOW WE MAKE
THIS SUSTAINABLE IN THOSE THOSE
ORGANIZATIONS IN TERMS
OF COMPLIANCE.
I'M NOT ACTUALLY I WOULDN'T
NECESSARILY SAY THAT WE ARE
UNUSUAL LOW FOR A CITY IN THEIR
THEIR THIRD OR FOURTH YEAR.
I WAS A LITTLE SURPRISED TO SEE
THAT IT IS AN ISSUE ACROSS
JURISDICTIONS.
I KNOW JAN WAS SHARING WITH ME
RECENTLY THAT SHE WAS LOOKING
AT A BUNCH OF JURISDICTIONS AND
THEY SEVENTY FIVE PERCENT
COMPLIANCE RATE IS GREAT.
NINETY FIVE IS EXCELLENT AND
EXTREMELY UNCOMMON SO IT IS
LOWER THAN WE'D LIKE BUT IT'S
IT'S NOT OUT OF LINE WITH A LOT
OF JURISDICTIONS AND AS YOU SAW
FROM THE PARTICIPATION RATES
I'D EXPECT OUR RATES TO
INCREASE SIGNIFICANTLY THIS
YEAR WITH CONTINUED OUTREACH.
>> THAT'S WHAT SHE MENTIONED TO
ME TOO.
SHE SAID I THINK CAMBRIDGE IS
NINETY FIVE PERCENT COMPLIANCE
AND THEY'VE HAD THAT PROGRAM
FOR TEN YEARS.
>> YEAH.
>> SO IF WE CAN DEFINITELY
YEAH.
BUT ON THE OTHER HAND WE DON'T
HAVE TEN YEARS TO TO REALLY
START TO MAKE THIS WORK.
>> I'M HOPING THAT YOU CAN PULL
UP SLIDE FIVE AND SPEND SOME
TIME TALKING TO US MORE ABOUT
THE THE REPORT THAT YOU SHOWED
THERE.
CAN YOU GO BACK AND.
SURE.
AND AS YOU'RE DOING THAT MY MY
SENSE IS THAT HOW BUILDINGS
COMPARE I MEAN SOME OF THE
COMPARISONS THAT YOU DRAW,
DREW, IS REALLY LESS IMPORTANT
THAN WHAT I WOULD CALL PEER TO
PEER PERFORMANCE.
SO HOW DOES THE FITNESS CENTER
COMPARE TO A FITNESS CENTER?
HOW DOES A PARKING GARAGE
COMPARE TO A PARKING GARAGE?
HOW TO PARKING GARAGES IN ANN
ARBOR COMPARED TO PARKING
GARAGES ELSEWHERE?
AND SO THE IDEA OR THE FACT
THAT LET'S SAY A FITNESS CENTER
HAS A HIGHER UI THAN A PARKING
GARAGE IS REALLY NOT ALL THAT
ILLUMINATING.
>> I THINK WHAT REALLY IS A
ILLUMINATING OR IMPORTANT IS
LIKE I WAS SAYING HOW DO
FITNESS CENTERS WITHIN ANN
ARBOR COMPARE TO EACH OTHER?
HOW DO THEY COMPARE TO THEM
NATIONWIDE?
WHAT ARE THE TRENDS LIKE?
IS ANN ARBOR DECARBONIZING OR
DECARBONIZING REDUCING ITS
ENERGY AND WATER USE INTENSITY
FASTER OR SLOWER THAN IN OTHER
COMMUNITIES?
THOSE ARE THE KINDS OF THINGS
THAT I THINK ARE REALLY, REALLY
IMPORTANT AND WHAT I WOULD LIKE
TO SEE HOPEFULLY ADDRESS
ADDRESSED IN FUTURE REPORTS AND
I'M HOPING THAT YOU CAN I DON'T
KNOW IF YOU CAN BLOW UP THAT
PORTION OF THE SLIDE.
MAYBE YOU CAN JUST DO IT WITH
YOUR CURSOR.
TELL US A LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT
THE REPORT.
>> JAN TOLD ME THAT THERE WAS A
SURVEY DONE OF COMMERCIAL
BUILDINGS IN 2003 AND THE US
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY HAS SET
SOME TARGETS WITHIN BUILDING
I'LL CALL THEM CLASSIFICATIONS
FOR REDUCTIONS COMPARED TO THAT
2003 LEVEL.
>> SHE SAID IT IS TWENTY FIVE
TO FORTY FIVE PERCENT BY 2030
AND FIFTY TO SIXTY FIVE PERCENT
BY 2050.
I THINK IT IS NO LET'S SEE YEAH
I'M NOT HERE.
>> I THINK THERE'S A DATE SHE
LEFT OUT IN ANY CASE IT SEEMS
TO ME LIKE I SAID THAT IS
REALLY, REALLY IMPORTANT AND
I'M HOPING THAT YOU CAN TALK A
LITTLE BIT MORE ABOUT THAT HOW
THAT INFORMATION IS CONVEYED TO
BUILDING ORDERS SO THAT THEY
GET A SENSE OF WHAT THEIR
PERFORMANCE IS AGAINST TRUE
PEERS AS OPPOSED TO LIKE I SAID
,A WAREHOUSE COMPARED TO A
FITNESS CENTER COMPARED TO A
WHATEVER I CAN.
YES.
AND THEY ARE DIFFERENT METRICS
THAT WE'RE LOOKING AT FOR
DIFFERENT PURPOSES.
SO WE AS A SOCIETY ARE GOING TO
LOOK AT THIS DATA NOT ONLY AT
INDIVIDUAL PROPERTIES FOR HOW
THEY SHOULD INDIVIDUALLY
IMPROVE BUT ALSO IF WE'RE
LOOKING AT INITIATIVES THAT
TARGET WELL NOT TARGET BUT OUR
BENEFIT COMMERCIAL AND
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES THAT ARE
LOOKING TO DECARBONIZE WHAT
WHAT USES SHOULD WE TARGET WHEN
WE'RE COMPARING THEM ACROSS
PROPERTY USES?
WHAT SHOULD BE OUR FOCUS?
WHAT ARE WE MOST IMPACTFUL
OVERALL?
WHAT WILL BE MOST IMPACTFUL FOR
A SPECIFIC USE?
SO THAT'S WHERE COMPARING
ACROSS PROPERTY TYPES COMES IN
.
THAT SAID, WHAT OUR PORTFOLIO
MANAGER DOES IS IT COMPARES
APPLES, APPLES, THE ENERGY STAR
SCORE THAT A FITNESS CENTER
GETS.
>> YES.
SO LIKE THIS ONE FOR EXAMPLE
MULTIFAMILY I BELIEVE THIS
WOULD BE THAT THAT SEVENTY ONE
PERCENT IS A BELL CURVE.
SO THAT IS MORE EFFICIENT THAN
SEVENTY ONE PERCENT
OF COMPARABLE PROPERTIES AND IT
COMPARES NOT ONLY BY THE
PROPERTY TYPE BUT THE IT THERE
ARE A BUNCH OF CALCULATIONS
THAT DOES ON THE BACK END FOR
THE SQUARE FOOTAGE PARKING IS
INCLUDED GETS REALLY SPECIFIC
BUT ENCLOSED PARTIALLY ENCLOSED
OPEN PARKING THAT'S INCLUDED TO
IF A LIKE SOME OF OUR
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES DO
DOWNTOWN THEY HAVE A SMALL
RESTAURANT UNDERNEATH THAT IS
ALSO INCLUDED IN THE OVERALL
PROPERTY UI AND IT COMPARES
WHEN YOU LOOK YOUR WEATHER
NORMALIZED CYBERSOURCE UI AND
UNDER STAR IT IS GOING TO ALSO
SHOW YOU THE THE RELATIVE
PERFORMANCE TO COMPARABLE
PROPERTIES OF YOUR SIZE USE AND
SO ON.
SO WHAT WE DID FOCUS ON BROADLY
THE PORTFOLIO OVERALL ENERGY
STAR WHAT IT DOES IS COMPARE
YOU TO OTHER PROPERTIES SO WHEN
WE LOOK INTO DOING THE
SCORECARDS FOR MORE PROPERTIES
THAT'S WHAT'S THAT'S GOING TO
SHOW LIKE FOR EXAMPLE IT'S HARD
TO MAKE OUT HERE I APOLOGIZE
BUT IN THAT TOP TRIANGLE
GRAPHIC YOU CAN SEE KIND
OF WHERE IT'S SITTING RIGHT.
>> SO THERE'S THAT TINY LITTLE
YEAH.
>> IF I CAN IF I CAN TRUST SOME
ASSURANCES THAT IS WHAT ENERGY
STAR DOES.
SO I DIDN'T FOCUS ON IT AS MUCH
HERE BUT CERTAINLY AS WE WERE
LOOKING AT WHAT TO DO WITH THIS
DATA I USED TO USE COMPARISONS.
>> WE'LL BE LOOKING BUT THEN
ALSO WITHIN EACH OF DO CERTAIN
SIZE OF MULTIFAMILY NEEDMORE
WHEN WE'RE WHEN WE'RE LOOKING
AT THEIR USES TO TO DO SO.
>> SO YES, LET'S SAY I'M THE
RECIPIENT OF THIS REPORT AND I
GOT A REPORT A YEAR AGO AND 12
MONTHS HAS PASSED AND A LOT
OF OTHER THINGS HAVE, YOU KNOW,
COME AT ME.
>> HOW DO I REMEMBER OR HOW
DOES THIS REPORT TELL ME ANY
KIND OF TREND INFORMATION SO
THIS YEAR OR LET'S SAY NOW IT'S
TWENTY TWO MONTHS FROM NOW LAST
YEAR WAS SEVENTY SEVENTY ONE.
HOW WILL
UP TO 65 OR MAYBE EVEN
WORSE OR THAT IMPROVE AND HOW
CAN I SEE FROM EACH AND REPORT
WHETHER I WENT FROM 71 TO 65 TO
62 AND SO ON AND SO FORTH THAT
IT SEEMS TO ME WOULD BE REALLY
,REALLY NICE AND TO BE IN ONE
REPORT AS OPPOSED TO ME HAVING
TO PULL UP SOMETHING THAT SAYS
THIS IS WHAT YOU LOOK LIKE 12
MONTHS GO 24, 36 AND CENTERA
MONTHS AGO.
>> IT'S A GOOD POINT.
FIRST I CAN SAY THAT GRANTED
IT'S A LITTLE MORE TECHNICAL
BUT IF YOU YOU'RE IF YOU'RE IF
A PROPERTY OWNER IS DOING THEIR
BENCHMARKING IN ENERGY STAR,
YOUR MANAGER, WHAT THEY'LL SEE
ON THEIR OVERVIEW PAGE IS THAT
IT IS GOING TO SHOW THEM OVER
TIME AND THEY CAN CHANGE THE
YEARS THAT THEY COMPARE.
AND AGAIN WITH THE
SUSTAINABILITY OF BENCHMARKING
WITHIN OWNERSHIP OR MANAGEMENT,
WHAT I'M NOW THAT WE ARE
INCREASING CLIENTS RATES, ONE
OF THE NEXT STEPS IS HOW DO WE
MAKE SURE THAT NOT ONLY DOES
COMPLIANCE CONTINUE BUT THAT
THEY'RE NOT SETTING IN FOR
GETTING WITH THE AUTOMATION
THAT WE WERE DOING.
AUTOMATION HELPS COMPLIANCE BUT
WE DON'T WANT THEM TO SET AND
FORGET.
I KNOW THE 20 30 DISTRICT FOR
SOME OF THEIR MEMBERS WHO THE
DISTRICT ACTUALLY USES THE SAME
SOFTWARE WE USED TO TRACK
BENCHMARKING BEYOND ENERGY STAR
THEY ARE GENERATING THEIR OWN
SCORECARDS FOR THEIR MEMBERS
SEPARATELY AND THEY'RE WHAT
THEY ARE DOING IS FOR SOME
OF THEM IS SITTING DOWN WITH
THOSE PROPERTIES.
>> HERE'S YOUR SCORECARDS.
HERE'S WHAT YOU MIGHT WANT TO
DO NEXT.
SO WHAT WE WILL BE THINKING
ABOUT IS EXACTLY THAT AS
COMPLIANCE INCREASES AND IT IS
EASIER TO DO, HOW DO WE MAKE
SURE THAT THAT DOESN'T GET LOST
AND THAT PROPERTY OWNERS KNOW
HOW THEY'RE PERFORMING AND KNOW
WHAT THEY SHOULD BE DOING NEXT?
SO WE ARE WE ARE THINKING ABOUT
THAT DEFINITELY IN TERMS
OF TARGETS OVERALL H0 IS
CARBON NEUTRALITY SO I DON'T I
CAN'T SPEAK TO SPECIFIC WHAT
JAN WAS REFERRING TO.
BUT THAT SAID, IF THE
COMMISSION HAS ANY INTEREST IN
SPECIFIC TARGETS YOU WANT TO
KNOW ABOUT OR THAT WE SHOULD
CONSIDER YOU'RE OBVIOUSLY
WELCOME TO SHARE THAT.
BUT AGAIN ALSO WE ARE GOING TO
THINK ABOUT THAT AS WELL AND
WHEN WE'RE DEVELOPING FUTURE
INITIATIVES THAT MIGHT FOCUS ON
THESE PROPERTY USES, THE
TARGETS MIGHT BE DIFFERENT FOR
DIFFERENT PROPERTIES.
>> OH, WHAT A MULTIFAMILY
PROPERTY DOES VERSUS A
RESTAURANT IS GOING TO BE VERY
DIFFERENT SO WE'LL MAKE SURE TO
INCORPORATE THAT AS WELL IN
TERMS OF TARGETS, I ASSUME
TARGETS WILL APPLY FOR
BASICALLY EVER CERTAINLY THE
FORESEEABLE FUTURE BECAUSE EVEN
IF A LET'S SAY A BUILDING IS
CARBON NEUTRAL BECAUSE IT'S ALL
ELECTRIC, IT'S STILL CONSUMING
ENERGY ENERGY AND SO THERE WILL
STILL WANT TO UNDERSTAND AND
WATER AND WE'LL STILL
UNDERSTAND WHETHER IT IS DOING
SO EFFICIENTLY AND WHETHER IT'S
CONTINUING TO REDUCE ITS ENERGY
USE INTENSITY EVEN IF IT'S
CARBON NEUTRAL.
>> DEFINITELY.
SO AGAIN, NOT GETTING INTO
SPECIFIC TARGETS BUT YES, IF A
NEWBUILD IS ALL ELECTRIC WE
STILL WANT TO KNOW HOW
EFFICIENT THEY ARE WHEN THEY'RE
BUILD.
>> EXACTLY.
YEAH, THAT'S ALL.
THANK YOU IS OUR QUESTION OVER
HERE.
>> HERE YOU GO.
>> ALL RIGHT.
THANKS.
THIS IS REALLY VERY, VERY
INTERESTING TO ME.
SO THE ANN ARBOR CHARTER
TOWNSHIP HAS LAST YEAR WE SET
UP OUR FACILITIES, YOU KNOW, IN
ENERGY START PORTFOLIO MANAGER
JUST LIKE LISTENING TO YOUR
PRESENTATION WHICH IS REALLY
GREAT IS HELPING ME UNDERSTAND
FURTHER WAYS THAT THE TOWNSHIP
CAN CAN UTILIZE THE DATA.
AND ONE OF THE THINGS THAT I
WANTED TO MAKE A COMMENT ON WAS
A PREVIOUS QUESTION THAT WAS
ASKED REGARDING YOU KNOW, WHY
ISN'T THERE HIGHER REPORTING,
HIGHER COMPLIANCE?
AND IT'S IT'S KIND OF IT'S
TRICKY TO SET IT UP AND FROM
WHAT CONNER'S RESPONSES HAVE
BEEN IN HIS DESCRIPTION, THE
PROCESS IS YOU REALLY THE
PERSON WHO ACTUALLY SETS IT UP
THAT SETS UP THE ACCOUNT HAS TO
UNDERSTAND IT HAS TO KNOW THE
BUILDING VERY WELL BECAUSE
THERE'S A LOT OF VERY SPECIFIC
QUESTIONS THAT ARE BEING ASKED
ABOUT NOT JUST THE UTILIZATION
BUT THIS SQUARE FOOTAGE AND A
LOT OF OTHER DETAIL.
>> SO THAT'S PART OF ONE OF THE
HURDLES AS FAR AS SETTING IT UP
IS CONCERNED THAT WAS SOMETHING
THAT WAS CHALLENGING FOR FOR US
AS WELL.
BUT ALSO WHEN YOU SAID
SUSTAINABILITY, DO YOU MEAN
LIKE AS ONGOING REPORTING TO
THE CITY OR OR WOULD YEAH.
>> IF I'M IF I'M CATCHING WHAT
YOU'RE REFERRING TO I'M
THINKING OF THE SUSTAINABILITY
OF BENCHMARKING IN A IN A LET'S
SAY THE OWNER OF A MULTIFAMILY
PROPERTY.
ODDS ARE SO FAR THE OWNERS ARE
NOT DOING THE BENCHMARKING.
THEY'RE ULTIMATELY RESPONSIBLE
FOR IT BUT IT'S THE PROPERTY
MANAGEMENT AND MAYBE A THIRD
PARTY SERVICE.
SO IF THAT PROPERTY MANAGER
LEAVES AND THEY WERE THE ONE
DOING IT, WE WANT TO MAKE SURE
THAT THAT IS SUSTAINABLE TO
CONTINUE WITHIN THE
ORGANIZATION.
>> IS THAT AM I ANSWERING THAT
RIGHT AND ALSO ONE OF THE
THINGS THAT I LEARNED IN
SETTING UP THE ACCOUNT FOR OUR
DIFFERENT FACILITIES IS THAT
THERE IS A CONTACT YOU KNOW,
EMAIL THAT CAN GET LOST IN
DURING TRANSITIONS.
>> YES.
SO THIS IS GOING TO BE REALLY
TECHNICAL ONE MORE THAN YOU
NEEDED TO BUT SO EACH ACCOUNT
AND ENERGY START BEFORE A
MANAGER.
EACH PROPERTY HAS A PROPERTY
DATA ADMINISTRATOR AND THAT IS
THE THE HIGHEST LEVEL
OF PERMISSIONS ON ACCOUNT HAVE
IF THAT PERSON LEAVES AN
ORGANIZATION THEN THAT PROPERTY
CAN STILL BE TRANSFERRED.
BUT IT'S TRICKIER WHEN YOU
DON'T HAVE THAT PERSON TO LOG
IN.
SO ONE THING I AM ADVOCATING
FOR IS THAT PROPERTIES USE A
GENERAL EMAIL THEY HAVE SO IT'S
NOT ONE PERSON EVEN IF THAT'S
THE PERSON DOING IT, IT'S A
CITY AT ANN REDUCTIVE THAT'S
NOT CITY BUT I MEAN SO THAT
THAT THAT CAN CONTINUE.
>> THAT SAID WITHIN A PROPERTY
YOU CAN HAVE DIFFERENT USERS
THAT HAVE DIFFERENT PERMISSION
LEVELS AND I HAVEN'T HAD TO DO
IT BUT MY UNDERSTANDING IS THAT
ENERGY STAR PORTFOLIO MANAGER
SUPPORT CAN ACTUALLY TRANSFER
PROPERTIES AND HELP YOU WITH
THAT IF SOMETHING WERE TO BE
LOST.
BUT IN TERMS OF SPECIFIC ACCESS
THAT IS SOMETHING THAT WE'VE
RUN INTO.
I THINK WE STARTED THIS BEFORE
BUT THEY CAN'T GET TO IT SO WE
HAVE TO FIND THE PERSON WITH
THE LOGIN TRANSFER SOMETHING
THAT IS AN ISSUE WE'VE RUN INTO
ONCE IN A WHILE.
>> YEAH, ALL RIGHT, THANKS.
>> AND IT IS I CAN ALSO SAY
THAT YEAH, IT IS COMPLICATED TO
SET UP PROPERTIES BUT ONE THING
THAT I'LL SAY AGAIN FOR THE
DATA AUTOMATION IT IS HELPFUL
FOR FOR EXAMPLE TO HAVE THE
AUTOMATED DATA PORTAL WHAT YOU
DO NEED A LOT OF INFORMATION
BUT RELATIVELY DEPENDING ON
WHAT THE ROLE IS, IT CAN BE
EASY OR HARD TO GET LIKE NUMBER
OF UNITS, ALL THE SERVICE
ADDRESSES FOR SOME COMMERCIAL
PROPERTIES OR MORE LIKE
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES IT CAN GET
A LITTLE TRICKIER BECAUSE
OF SOME OF THE THINGS YOU NEED
TO KNOW.
I CAN I CAN SAY FRANKLY FOR
THINGS LIKE OUR WATER TREATMENT
PLANT ENERGY STAR HAS SPECIFIC
THINGS FOR WATER TREATMENT
PLANTS.
THEY'VE HAVE A WHOLE WEBINAR
THAT THAT I'VE BEEN TO ON
BENCHMARKING WATER TREATMENT
PLANTS BUT IT'S WEIRD THEY HAVE
FLOW METERS FOR ALL THE METERS
THROUGH THERE AND WE FOUND THAT
OUR WATER TREATMENT PLANT I DID
THE FLOW METER BUT BUILDING
USAGE IS NOT SEPARATED OUT.
SO THAT'S SOMETHING WE FOUND IN
THERE.
BUT IT'S IT IT'S REALLY
INTRICATE.
YEAH.
AND DIFFERENT PROPERTY TYPES
SETTING UP DATA CENTER USAGE.
THERE'S A WHOLE WAY TO DO THAT
DEPENDING ON THE EQUIPMENT
TYPE, HOW IT'S POWERED, WHERE
THE METER THE USAGE IS
MEASURED.
>> IT IT'S KIND OF A ROUNDABOUT
WAY TO SAY IT.
>> IT CAN BE REALLY TRICKY FOR
PROPERTIES AND WE'RE TRYING TO
EASE THAT ESPECIALLY WHEN WE
HAVE A LOT OF PROPERTIES WHO
ARE MULTIFAMILY OR OFFICE
PROPERTIES TRYING TO GET KIND
OF STREAMLINED WAYS TO DO THAT.
>> OK, IT'S GOING TO BE A
LITTLE BIT THE NUMBERS ARE
GOING TO JUST AS FAR AS
PARTICIPATE AND WILL CREEP UP
YEAR AFTER YEAR AS YOU CONTACT
THE RIGHT PEOPLE SEEMS KIND
OF A CHALLENGE.
>> IS IT REALLY GETTING A HOLD
THE RIGHT PERSON?
>> YEAH, IT WAS ESPECIALLY
EARLY ON THERE WAS A CHALLENGE.
YOU GET TO THE RIGHT PERSON AND
ESPECIALLY GETTING INTO GETTING
THE DATA ITSELF.
LET'S SAY WE FIND THE RIGHT
PERSON IN TO DO THE
BENCHMARKING FOR A COMMERCIAL
STRIP MALL.
THEY SAY I'M DOING IT.
TELL ME WHAT I NEED TO DO IF
THEY ARE NOT IF THEY DON'T HAVE
ACCESS THAT ONLINE ACCOUNT OR
THEY'RE NOT AN AUTHORIZED USER,
THAT'S GREAT.
WE FOUND THE RIGHT PERSON.
NOW WE NEED TO FIGURE OUT WHO
HAS ACCESS TO THAT AND WHO'S
LISTED OR GET THAT PERSON ADDED
SO WE CAN GET THAT DATA SO IT
IS FINDING THE RIGHT PERSON TO
DO IT, FINDING THE RIGHT PERSON
TO GET THE DATA FROM THE
UTILITIES AND THEN OR IF IT'S A
REALLY SPECIFIC QUESTION LIKE I
DON'T KNOW IF WE HAVE
SPRINKLERS I HAVE TO TALK TO MY
MAINTENANCE MANAGER ABOUT THAT
NOW TO SO ALSO KACHING WHEN WE
START TO GET TO THOSE SCENARIOS
OH, YOU MENTIONED YOU HAVE
IRRIGATION.
LET'S CATCH THAT BEFORE WE GET
TO THAT LATER OR UP FRONT.
>> DO YOU HAVE ACCESS TO YOUR
ACCOUNT?
DO YOU KNOW WHO DOES?
IF WE CAN FIND THAT OUT UP
FRONT, THAT ALSO HELPS OUT A
LOT WHEN WE'RE GETTING STARTED
WITH A PROPERTY.
SO TRYING TO CATCH THOSE PAIN
POINTS EARLY AND WE'RE GETTING
BETTER AT IT AS WE GET MORE
PROPERTIES THROUGH THE PROCESS
.
CERTAINLY I IMAGINE THE SAME
THING WITH THE TWENTY THIRD
DISTRICT WHEN THEY'RE HELPING
OTHER MUNICIPALITIES THEY'RE
PROBABLY LEARNING A LOT ABOUT
MUNICIPAL FACILITIES.
YEAH AND THE INTRICACIES THERE.
>> YEAH.
THANKS FOR GIVING US THAT
GRANULARITY BECAUSE IT REALLY
HELPS US YOU KNOW EVERYBODY
UNDERSTAND WHAT THE PROCESS IS
AND WHAT THE CHALLENGES.
I WILL ALSO SAY THAT IF YOU A
LOT OF DIFFERENT PROPERTIES
TYPES CAN BE BENCHMARKED IF YOU
OWN A SINGLE FAMILY YOU CAN
BENCHMARK YOUR OWN HOME AND SEE
WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE A LITTLE
BIT.
YOU WON'T BE ABLE TO USE THE
ENERGY DATA HUB BUT IF YOU JUST
USE YOUR BILLS OR DOWNLOAD YOUR
USAGE FROM YOUR ACCOUNT, YOU
CAN GO THROUGH IT FOR FOR THAT
AS WELL.
>> YEAH, GO AHEAD.
GO AHEAD.
I'D LIKE TO CLARIFY ONE THING.
>> SO I REREAD WHAT GENERAL
MILLS HAD TO DO WITH TARGETS
AND WHAT SHE WROTE IS 2030
DERIVES THEIR TARGETS AND WHAT
SHE MEANS BY THAT IS THE 2030
DISTRICT DERIVED THEIR TARGETS
NOT THE CITY.
>> BUT WHAT I WOULD LIKE THE
CITY TO DO IS THINK ABOUT
TARGETS THEY WOULDN'T BE
BINDING BUT WHAT THEIR TARGETS
ARE THEY'RE DERIVED FROM A
PERCENT OF A 2003 COMMERCIAL
BUILDING ENERGY CONSUMPTION
SURVEY AND THEY'RE THE TWENTY,
THIRTY DISTRICTS.
>> SO IF YOU REMEMBER A
DISTRICT YOU'RE BEING FED
TARGETS IN TWENTY TWENTY FIVE.
THE TARGET WOULD BE THIRTY FIVE
TO FORTY FIVE PERCENT OF THE
2003 MEDIAN AND BY 2030 THE
GOAL IS FIFTY TO SIXTY FIVE
PERCENT AND I DON'T KNOW WHY
THE RANGE IS SO BIG OF THE 2003
MEDIAN SO THE TWENTY THIRTY
DISTRICT HAS TARGETS AND IT
MIGHT MAKE SENSE THAT WE AS A
CITY START TO COMMUNICATE A
TARGET QUOTE UNQUOTE TO
BUILDINGS WHICH IS LET'S SAY
COMMENSURATE WITH WHAT WE'RE
TRYING TO DO WITH THE TWENTIETH
OR WHAT THERE ARE A TWO ZERO
PLAN THAT EXTENDS WHAT I JUST
IT DOES AND WE CERTAINLY
SOMETHING WE WERE LOOKING AT AS
WHAT OUR GOALS ARE FOR ENERGY
USE REDUCTION.
I THINK IF I CAN CLARIFY I MAY
HAVE SAID THOSE PERCENT
DECREASES ARE IN GREENHOUSE GAS
EMISSIONS.
I BELIEVE NOT ENERGY USE
OVERALL.
>> IS THAT RIGHT?
COULD BE SHE DIDN'T SAY WHAT
THE UNIT IS.
>> I BELIEVE THAT'S IT.
THE TWENTY THIRTY DISTRICT AS A
WHOLE FOR ITS MEMBERS HAS
SPECIFIC TARGETS NOT ONLY FOR
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSION
REDUCTION BUT ALSO VEHICLE
MILES TRAVELED AND I BELIEVE
THOSE PERCENTS ARE GREENHOUSE
GAS EMISSION NOT THIRTY FIVE TO
FIFTY PERCENT OF ENERGY USE
REDUCTION SHOULD USE AS THEY
RUN THE BUILDINGS THROUGH THE
ZERO TOOL TO GENERATE THE 2003
BASELINE TO CALCULATE THE
TARGET.
>> I'M LOOSELY AWARE OF HOW
THEY THE METRIC SO YOU COULD
TOUCH ME WITH HER AND GO FROM
THERE.
SHE'S THE EXPERT WEEKLY GOOD.
THE LAST THING I WOULD SAY IS
WHAT WE'RE SEEING HERE IS
CONFIRMS THE THE MODEL WHAT
GETS MEASURED GETS DONE EXACTLY
.
>> KATMAI, THANK YOU SO MUCH
FOR THIS GREAT PRESENTATION.
>> IT CLEARLY LIKE A TREASURE
TROVE OF DATA THAT YOU CAN READ
TO SO MANY GREAT THINGS AND I
KNOW I FOR ONE WILL DEFINITELY
BE CHECKING OUT ALCOHOL.
I HAD NEVER HEARD OF THAT
BEFORE SO I'M REALLY INTERESTED
IN THAT.
AND THEN ALSO YOU JUST SAYING
THAT YOU CAN BENCHMARK YOUR OWN
HOUSE, DEFINITELY BE LOOKING
INTO THAT.
I HAD TWO QUICK QUESTIONS FOR
YOU.
YOU MENTIONED A LOT
OF PERCENTAGES AND THINGS
RELATED TO PARTICIPANTS.
DO YOU HAVE THE OUTRIGHT NUMBER
OF PROPERTIES PARTICIPATING
RIGHT NOW?
>> YOU KNOW, AN AGGREGATE
OF EVERYTHING.
I JUST LIKE THE EXACT NUMBER
BUT IT IS IN THE REPORT
ACTUALLY OK AND IT GETS MORE
GRANULAR THAN YOU MAY WANT TO
KNOW OR MAY YOU MAY WANT TO BUT
I DO BREAK DOWN IN THE REPORT I
BELIEVE THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF PROPERTIES WHO ARE INITIALLY
COVERED BASED ON THE THE
OVERALL INITIAL CRITERIA AND
THE ORDINANCE LIKE MULTIFAMILY
AND COMMERCIAL PROPERTIES OVER
TWENTY THOUSAND SQUARE FEET
OF GROWTH AREA PERIOD AFTER WE
TAKE OUT PROPERTIES WHO ARE NOT
SUBJECT TO THE ORDINANCE LIKE
UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN AND
OTHER PUBLIC SCHOOLS, I BELIEVE
I HAVE THAT NUMBER AND THEN THE
PERCENT OF THE CURRENTLY
REQUIRED PROPERTIES WHO ARE
REQUIRED TO COMPLY WITH THE
ORDINANCE WHO ARE NOT EXEMPT
WHICH WILL SHOW YOU THE NUMBER
OUT OF THE PROPERTIES WHO ARE
NOT YOU HAVE NOT NO PUBLIC
SCHOOLS PROPERTIES FOR THAT
COMPLIANCE HERE WHO ARE NOT
VACANT.
THOSE CAN BE EXEMPT AS WELL.
SO THINGS LIKE THAT TAKING
EXCEPTIONS IT WILL SHOW YOU I
BELIEVE THE NUMBER WHO ARE THEN
REQUIRED TO AND THEN THE NUMBER
WHO ARE COMPLIANT.
SO DIFFERENT LEVELS OF THOSE.
SO WHEN I WHEN I LOOK AT
COMPLIANCE RATES I'M LOOKING AT
THE PROPERTIES WHO HAVE TO
COMPLY.
THEY'RE NOT EXEMPT.
THEY'RE NOT U OF THEY'RE NOT
VACANT.
>> SO THERE ARE MORE PROPERTIES
WHO MAY BE COVERED OR PROPERTY
WHO'S VACANT ONE YEAR AND IS
NOT ANOTHER YEAR BUT THAT'S
THAT'S THAT PERCENTAGE OF WHO
NEEDS TO WHO IS BUT THERE ARE
THERE ARE MORE LEVELS TO IT IN
THE REPORT.
>> AWESOME.
THANK I'LL I'LL LOOK FOR THAT.
MY LAST QUESTION THEN IS SO
LIKE I SAID THIS PROVIDES A
CRAZY AMOUNT OF DATA AND WHAT
WAYS I GUESS IS THE CITY, YOU
KNOW, PLANNING TO USE SOME
OF THIS DATA BEYOND JUST THIS
SPECIFIC EXERCISE?
AND I'M THINKING, YOU KNOW, ONE
OF THE METRICS THAT WAS
REPORTED WAS AVERAGE FOUR
PERCENT OF ENERGY FROM
ELECTRICITY.
YOU KNOW, SOME OF THE LOWER
PERCENT OF ENERGY USE INCLUDE
K-12 SCHOOLS, WORSHIP
FACILITIES, RESIDENCE HALL
DORMS ARE THOSE YOU KNOW, FOR
INSTANCE THEN FACILITIES THAT
THE CITY MIGHT TARGET TO TRY TO
ELECTRIFY OR PROVIDE EXTRA
RESOURCES NOTING THAT THEY'RE
ALREADY KIND OF LOWER IN THE
ELECTRIC USE.
IS THAT SOMETHING THAT'S YOU
KNOW, ON THE CITY'S RADAR AND
WAYS TO USE ALL OF THIS DATA?
A LOT OF THE METRICS THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT ARE GOING TO BE ON
OUR RADAR BUT WE'RE WELL, I
IMAGINE WE ARE GOING TO LOOK AT
ELECTRIFICATION AND THEN
RELATIVE ENERGY USE INTENSITY
ACROSS PROPERTIES.
I CAN'T SPEAK TO SPECIFIC
INITIATIVES YET BUT BUT WITH
THAT ANSWER IS THAT WE ARE
GOING TO TRY TO TAKE ALL
OF THIS DATA TO LOOK BROADLY
OF WE SEE WORSHIP FACILITIES
SEEM TO BE USING A LOT OF GAS.
SO YES, LET'S DO SOME OUTREACH
THERE AND SEE IS THERE INTEREST
IN ELECTRIFICATION?
WHAT ARE THE BARRIERS?
WHAT'S THE INTEREST?
RESTAURANTS HAVE MAYBE AN EVEN
SPLIT BUT THEY'RE REALLY ENERGY
USE INTENSIVE AND IT'S REALLY
TRICKY TO ELECTRIFY IN SOME
CASES OR SOME SOME UNIQUE
BARRIERS THERE AND WHAT WHAT DO
DIFFERENT USES NEED?
WHAT DO THEY WANT?
WHAT CAN WE DO?
WHAT RESOURCES CAN WE HAVE
AVAILABLE TO THEM?
WHAT'S FEASIBLE AND KIND
OF TAKE A BROAD LOOK OVERALL
AND THEN START LOOKING AT WHAT
WE SHOULD TARGET?
>> AND I'LL SAY THAT IF THE
COMMISSION HAS THOUGHTS OR
PRIORITIES THAT THEY WANT TO
COMMUNICATE, I THINK YOU HAVE
TO GO THROUGH JOE.
BUT YOU CAN LET JOE KNOW WHAT
WHAT YOU WANT US TO LOOK AT.
>> WE'RE GOING TO BE LOOKING AT
A LOT.
BUT IF YOU HAVE PRIORITIES,
PLEASE COMMUNICATE THAT ALSO
NOT A I DON'T MEAN TO SKIP OVER
SPECIFIC NUMBERS.
>> I CAN SAY FOR THE NUMBER
OF PROPERTIES I BELIEVE
GENERALLY THE TOTAL NUMBER
OF PROPERTIES BY SQUARE FOOTAGE
IS SOMEWHERE AROUND THE SEVEN
HUNDRED PLUS NUMBER THE TOTAL
NONPERMANENT EXCEPTIONS YOU
COULD SAY LIKE U OF IS CLOSER
TO FOUR HUNDRED AND SOMETHING
AND THEN THE TOTAL DEPENDING
THE COMPLIANCE YOU'RE LIKE FOR
TWENTY TWENTY THREE EXCLUDING
SOME OTHER EXEMPTIONS JUST
UNDER FOUR HUNDRED OR SO.
SO OVERALL IT'S ABOUT YOU CAN
SAY THREE HUNDRED AND SEVENTY
FIVE TO FOUR HUNDRED PROPERTIES
MOVING FORWARD HOPEFULLY YOU WE
MAY HAVE SOME NEW BUILDINGS
COMING AS WELL BUT IN THAT
RANGE IS THE TOTAL NUMBER THAT
WE'RE WORKING COMPLIANT.
>> AWESOME.
THANKS SO MUCH.
I LOOK FORWARD TO SEEING WHERE
THIS KIND OF DATA AND STUFF
PLUGS INTO VARIOUS INITIATIVES
AND SEEING WHERE THIS GOES.
>> THANKS.
I AGREE IT WAS IT WAS REALLY
INTERESTING TO LOOK THROUGH THE
DATA FRANKLY IT WAS REALLY
EXCITING TO TO SEE SOME THINGS
START TO EMERGE.
YES.
A COUPLE QUESTIONS ENFORCEMENT
IS BEING IS APPROACHING.
>> SO CAN YOU REMIND ME WHAT
THAT LOOKS LIKE IN TERMS OF THE
PROCESS ITSELF OR PROCESS OR.
YEAH, WHAT I'M SURE I APPROVE
THIS I CAN'T RECALL THE DETAILS
AROUND ENFORCEMENT AND YOU IF
THAT'S SO I CAN SAY THAT ALWAYS
HAS ENFORCEMENT CAPACITY.
I AM NOT THE PERSON WHO WOULD
WRITE TICKETS SO I CAN'T SPEAK
TO THE SPECIFIC PROCESS TOO
MUCH.
WHAT I WILL EMPHASIZE AGAIN IS
THAT WE ARE GOING TO BE
SPRINTING HARD AT COMPLIANCE
AND OUR GOAL IS TO NOT ISSUE
TICKETS.
WE PROBABLY WILL HAVE TO BUT
OUR GOAL IS NOT TO THE GOAL IS
TO GET THE INFORMATION TO FOLKS
WITH A TEN FOLD INCREASE LAST
YEAR.
I'M OPTIMISTIC WE CAN GET
REALLY, REALLY HIGH COMPLIANCE
RATES IF WE HAVE TO TICKET WE
WILL BUT THAT'S NOT THE GOAL.
>> I'M SURE WE COULD WE COULD
GET SOME MORE DETAILS ON
EXACTLY WHAT THAT LOOKS LIKE
AFTER THE AFTER THE MEETING.
I I'M NOT THE ONE WHO HAD ISSUE
TICKETS SAID I HAVE A LOT
OF INFORMATION ON IT.
>> YEAH, OK.
YEAH I JUST CAN COULDN'T QUITE
REMEMBER IT WASN'T IT ISN'T IT.
FIVE HUNDRED FORTY TWO THOUSAND
PER DAY UP TO FIVE HUNDRED FOR
THE FIRST FENCE UP TO A
THOUSAND FOR THE FOR EACH
SUBSEQUENT OFFENSE AND THE
OFFENSE DEFINITIONS ARE IN THE
AUDIENCE AND THEN IT GETS
BEYOND I GUESS YOU CAN GO
REFRESH MY MEMORY ON THAT ONE
HERE AND THEN ON THE OBVIOUSLY
OTHER COMMUNITIES ARE PROVIDING
SAYING THAT OUR COMPLIANCE IT'S
TO BE EXPECTED IN TERMS
OF WHERE WE'RE AT ARE WE
COMPARING OUR DATA TO OTHER
COMMUNITIES IN TERMS OF SEEING
IF OUR BENCHMARK DATA IS SORT
OF IN TERMS OF BUILDING TYPES
AND USAGES IS FAIRLY COMPARABLE
ACROSS COMMUNITIES?
>> THAT'S A QUESTION I DIDN'T
ANSWER FROM COMMISSIONERSHIP
EITHER BY ACCIDENT I ACTUALLY
WE IT'S NOT SOMETHING WE'VE
LOOKED AT YET AND I DON'T KNOW
IF WHAT WE THEORETICALLY
PROBABLY COULD DO IS LOOK AT
ALL OF THE PROPERTIES SHARED
WITH OUR ENERGY STAR PROFILE
AND LOOK AT HOW THAT COMPARES
OVERALL IT SOME DATA WORK BUT
STEP BACK ENERGY STAR FOR EVERY
PROPERTY PROPERTY WILL AT LEAST
SHOW HOW IT COMPARES TO THE
NATIONAL MEDIAN SO WE COULD
DOVE IN DEEP INTO ALL THE
PROPERTIES SOUGHT BY USE TYPE
AND SEE OVERALL ON AVERAGE HOW
WE'RE COMPARING NATIONWIDE.
I WOULD HAVE TO LOOK FURTHER
INTO COMPARING TO SPECIFIC
PROPERTIES OR SPECIFIC OTHER
JURISDICTIONS AND HOW THEY'RE
PERFORMING BUT I WILL PUT IT ON
MY LIST BECAUSE THAT WOULD BE
INTERESTING ESPECIALLY WITH
DETROIT HAVING THEIR FIRST YEAR
OF BENCHMARKING AS WELL SEEING
IF COMPARABLE MICHIGAN
COMMUNITIES HAVE ANY TRENDS
THAT WE CAN WE COULD SEE.
>> YEAH, IN A PART OF THE
REASON I ASK THAT IS I WOULD
ASSUME THAT ONE OF THE WE'RE
OBVIOUSLY LEADING IN SOME AREAS
AND THEN IN SOME WAYS OBVIOUSLY
HAVE GOT OTHER COMMUNITIES THAT
ARE AHEAD OF US AND SO BEING
ABLE TO TURN TO THEM IN TERMS
OF OBVIOUSLY WE WANT BUILDING
OWNERS TO TAKE ACTION AND SO
KIND OF WHAT HAS BEEN
SUCCESSFUL IN TERMS OF MOVING
THE NEEDLE FOR THOSE DIFFERENT
TYPES OF BUILDING TYPES?
I SUSPECT THERE'S BEEN SOME
LEARNING CURVES ACROSS IT
ACROSS COMMUNITIES FOR THAT.
>> SO THAT'S PART OF WHERE I
WAS GOING WITH THAT QUESTION.
IT IS DEFINITELY SOMETHING
WE'LL LOOK AT.
I'LL SAY NOT ALL THE METRICS
WE'RE LOOKING AT GOT INTO THE
PRESENTATION OF THE REPORT
BECAUSE THERE'S LIKE THREE
HUNDRED AND SOMETHING METRICS
THAT ENERGY STAR CAN GENERATE I
WILL BE AND HAVE LOOKED AT A
LITTLE BIT IS ON AVERAGE HOW
ARE PROPERTIES THE AVERAGE EROI
COMPARED TO THE NATIONAL MEDIAN
AND WE ARE SEEING THAT SOME
PROPERTY TYPES OVERALL TEND TO
BE MORE OR LESS BUT GETTING
INTO THAT WE ARE ALSO THE
IN-BETWEEN STEP IS WORKING WITH
YOU TO THE UTILITIES TO MAKE
SURE THE DATA IS ACCURATE.
IF WE'RE SEEING A PROPER USE
COMPARED TO THE NATIONAL MEDIAN
IS 70 PERCENT MORE EFFICIENT
THAN THE NATIONAL MEDIAN WANT
TO MAKE SURE THAT THAT'S
ACCURATE IF WE'RE LOOKING TO
COMPARE TO NOT JUST THE
NATIONAL MEDIAN BUT OTHER
JURISDICTIONS SO LONG ANSWER
OF YES, THAT IS SOMETHING THAT
WE'RE INTERESTED IN.
I'LL LOOK INTO THE BEST WAY TO
DO THAT TO SPECIFIC
JURISDICTION.
BUT AND THEN ALSO ON WHAT WHAT
DO WE DO NEXT?
ALSO SOMETHING WE'LL BE LOOKING
AT IS WHAT OF OTHER
MUNICIPALITIES DONE WHEN
THEY'RE LOOKING TO TARGET
INITIATIVES TO HELP PROPERTIES
BECOME MORE EFFICIENT?
>> WHAT HAVE THEY DONE?
WHAT HAVE THEY LEARNED
SOMETHING WE'RE LOOKING AT AND
THEN I SUSPECT THIS DIFFERS BY
PROPERTY SIZE CERTAINLY.
>> BUT IN TERMS OF THE TAKING
ACTION COMPONENT, YOU KNOW,
WE'RE GOING TO OBVIOUSLY
MEASURING PROGRESS ON WHAT
TYPES OF ACTIONS BEING TAKEN
BUT THINKING ABOUT THE THE TYPE
OF WORK THAT IT'S TAKEN TO GET
COMPLIANCE AND GET THIS
INFORMATION UP AND GOING WITH
TO SOME DEGREE CULTIVATED A
SMALL GROUP OF EXPERTS IN OUR
OWN COMMUNITY AROUND THEIR
BUILDING TYPE AND MAYBE THEY'RE
THE ONES THAT ARE GETTING THE
REPORTS BUT THEY MAY NOT BE THE
ONES WHO ARE CHARGED WITH
TAKING ACTION.
>> I GUESS IT PROBABLY DEPENDS
ON ON PROPERTY SIZE BUT I'M
WONDERING IF THERE ARE WAYS
THAT WE'RE THINKING ABOUT HOW
WE MIGHT BE ABLE TO.
>> IS THERE A DISCONNECT?
I GUESS BETWEEN BETWEEN THOSE
USER GROUPS AND THEN, YOU KNOW,
ARE THERE WAYS TO BE
CULTIVATING THAT GROUP THAT
ACTUALLY HAS MAYBE A MORE IN
DEPTH KNOWLEDGE NOW OF THEIR
ENERGY USAGE WITHIN THEIR
BUILDINGS?
IF I CAN CLARIFY THE I THINK
CORRECTLY THE CONCERN BEING
THAT WE ARE MAYBE WORKING WITH
FOLKS WHO ARE DOING THE
BENCHMARKING BUT NOT THOSE WHO
WILL BE DECIDING WHETHER TO
MAKE IMPROVEMENTS TO
PROPERTIES.
YES, THAT'S SOMETHING THAT I
THAT I AM THINKING ABOUT EVEN
DOWN TO THE LEVEL OF FOUR
MULTIFAMILY HOUSING PROPERTY
MANAGERS PROBABLY DOING THE
REPORT WE'RE WORKING WITH THEIR
BILLING SERVICE.
BUT DOES THE PROPERTY MANAGER
ARE THE THE SERVICE MANAGER DO
THEY ARE THEY INVOLVED AT ALL?
DO THEY DO THEY HAVE A TIME?
DO THEY HAVE THE CAPACITY?
ARE THEY READY TO IF A FURNACE
GOES CAN THEY PUT IN A HEAT
PUMP?
ARE THEY READY TO OR ARE THEY
JUST GOING TO GET ANOTHER GAS
BECAUSE THAT'S QUICK AND EASY.
SO IT IS SOMETHING WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT WHEN WE LOOK TO
FUTURE INITIATIVES OF WHEN
WE'RE LOOKING AT DIFFERENT
TYPES OF PROPERTIES.
WHAT ARE ALL THE BARRIERS
INCLUDING MAYBE A LET'S SAY A
RESTAURANT THAT DOESN'T OWN
THEIR BUILDING AND THEY NEED TO
DO SOME WORK THAT INVOLVES
WORKING WITH THE PROPERTY OWNER
RESTAURANTS CAN'T STAY DOWN FOR
WEEKS WAITING TO FIGURE OUT
WHAT TO DO WITH THEIR SYSTEM.
SO IT'S SOMETHING WE'RE
THINKING ABOUT IS NOT ONLY
THOSE THE DISCONNECT BUT HOW DO
YOU GET HOW DO YOU GET
PROPERTIES READY TO DO THAT IF
THEY'RE NOT READY TO NOW
BECAUSE THEY DON'T NEED TO
NECESSARILY DO EVERYTHING TODAY
BUT IF THEY KNOW THEIR FURNACE
HAS FIVE YEARS LEFT, HOW DO WE
GET THEM INFORMATION TO START
THAT THAT CONVERSATION NOW?
>> ABSOLUTELY
.
>> COMMISSION WORK WITH JUST
HEARING TALK ABOUT ENFORCEMENT
IN NEXT STEPS SPARK SOMETHING
FOR ME JUST A COMMENT.
LAST YEAR WE HAD A LITTLE
WORKING GROUP THAT WAS
RESEARCHING THE INCENTIVES OR
DISINCENTIVES FOR GAS USAGE IN
BUILDINGS AND A LOT OF THE
RESEARCH KEPT LEADING ME BACK
TO BUILDING PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS.
THIS IS ESSENTIALLY LIKE A
REQUIREMENT THAT BUILDINGS YOU
BECOME MORE EFFICIENT OR USE
LESS ENERGY OR EMIT LESS
GREENHOUSE GAS EMISSIONS FOR
WATER USAGE AS WELL.
AND YOU KNOW, I DON'T WANT TO
GET AHEAD OF ANYTHING BUT I'LL
JUST SAY LIKE THE VAST MAJORITY
OF CITIES ACROSS THE COUNTRY
THAT HAVE PASSED OR ADOPTED
BUILDING PERFORMANCE STANDARDS
,MOST OF THEM STARTED WITH A
BENCHMARKING OR ORDINANCE AND
LIKE GETTING THE COMPLIANCE
LEVELS UP, FIGURING OUT HOW
WE'RE TALKING THROUGH ALL
OF THE THINGS THAT YOU JUST
LAID OUT COUNTER LIKE ALL THESE
NUANCES AND INTRICACIES AND THE
DIFFERENCE BETWEEN ALL THESE
PORTFOLIOS IN THE PRIVACY
ISSUES AND THINGS WE'RE KIND
OF THE PATH I THINK THAT TOOK A
LOT OF THEM TO GET THERE.
SO I'LL JUST SAY THAT, YOU
KNOW, AT SOME POINT IN THE
FUTURE COUNCIL THE CITY IS
INTERESTED IN REQUIRING
BUILDINGS TO HIT SOMETHING OR
COMMISSIONER MIRSKY MENTIONED
SETTING TARGETS FOR THE
BENCHMARKING PERFORMANCE.
YOU KNOW THIS IS I THINK A KEY
PIECE IN GETTING THERE IF THAT
WERE TO BE A POLICY THAT FOLKS
WANTED TO PURSUE, I'LL BRIEFLY
TOUCH AND JOE CAN ADD IF NEEDED
ON I THINK BY DESIGN BUILDING
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS NEED SOME
TYPE OF BENCHMARKING SO YOU CAN
YOU CAN TRACK IT.
BUT IT CURRENTLY WE'RE NOT ABLE
TO WE WOULD NOT BE ABLE TO
IMPLEMENT THEM ON THE LOCAL
LEVEL DUE TO PREEMPTION BY THE
STATE.
SO IF WE'RE LOOKING AT TARGETS
IT WOULD GOALS FOR PROPERTIES
AND GOALS THAT WE'RE LOOKING TO
HELP THEM GET TO NOT YEAH NOT
REQUIREMENTS.
>> I'LL JUST SAY I DON'T THINK
THAT'S THE CASE FOR BUILDING
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS OR
BUILDING EMISSION STANDARDS.
>> THOSE ARE NOT PREEMPTED BY
THE STATE TO MY KNOWLEDGE THAT
EXCEPT THAT MAYBE WE USE THE
WRONG TERMINOLOGY.
I DON'T LIKE BUILDING CODES ARE
WE'VE GOTTEN SOME GUIDANCE
AROUND DIFFICULTIES AROUND IT.
I'M NOT SURE WHAT THE EXACT
SPECIFICS ARE BUT YEAH, AS
OF NOW SEEMS TO BE THERE IS
SOMETHING BLOCKING IT TO SOME
EXTENT.
>> ABSOLUTELY.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT WE GO
INTO THIS WITH IF THERE'S YOU
KNOW, FUZZY AREAS IN THERE.
YOU KNOW, A LOT OF CITIES LIKE
NEW YORK THEY'RE DEFENDING
THEIR BUILDING PERFORMANCE
STANDARD RIGHT NOW AT THE
COURTS.
>> SO YOU DON'T WANT TO WAIT TO
SEE HOW THAT COURT CASE SHAKES
OUT.
THEY HAVE A STRONG CASE.
THEY SHOULD BE FINE.
BUT YOU KNOW, THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR WOULDN'T WANT TO JUMP
INTO THIS UNTIL ALL OF THE
LEGAL SITUATIONS ARE SETTLED.
>> BUT I DO THINK THERE'S A
THOUGHT ANYWAY WE'D LOVE TO
TALK ABOUT MORE OFFLINE IF AND
WHEN THAT EVER BECOMES A
PERTINENT CONVERSATION.
I CAN'T SPEAK TO THE AUTHORITY
BUT I CAN SAY WHEN WHEN WE ARE
LOOKING AT INITIATIVES THAT IS
THAT IS PART OF THE
CONVERSATION OF IF WE'RE NOT
REQUIRING THIS WE NEED TO MAKE
SURE WE COMMUNICATE THE
BENEFITS OF THIS TO NEW
PROPERTIES.
HERE'S THE INITIATIVES.
HERE'S THE BENCHMARKING.
HERE'S THE OPPORTUNITIES LIKE
HERE.
HERE'S THE COST SAVINGS YOU
COULD HAVE ESPECIALLY IF IT'S
AN OWNER THAT PAYS PART OR ALL
OF THE ENERGY BILLS.
SO IN WITHOUT THE REQUIREMENTS
SHOWING THEM THAT THERE ARE
BENEFITS BENEFITS TO THIS AND
TALKING ABOUT WHAT THEY WANT,
WHAT ARE YOUR GOALS?
>> DO THEY ALIGN?
HOW CAN WE ALL QUESTIONS?
WELL, WE'LL BE TRYING TO ASK
JUST JUST ONE ONE QUICK QUICK
QUESTION AND JUST CLARIFICATION
AND THEN WE'LL WE'LL WE'LL
WE'LL MOVE ON WITH RESPECT TO
THE COMPLIANCE AROUND THE
MULTIFAMILY AND OFFICE
BUILDINGS THAT SEEM TO BE
HIGHER ON AVERAGE.
>> AND I I WAS JUST HOPING IF
YOU MIGHT BE ABLE TO CLARIFY
WHETHER THAT WAS PRIMARILY DUE
TO IN MY ASSUMPTION IS THAT
THERE MAY BE TEAMS MANAGING
THOSE BUILDINGS AND SO THERE'S
CAPACITY IN A SENSE TO DO THE
WORK AROUND THE BENCHMARKING
AND I WAS JUST WONDERING IF
THAT WAS SOMETHING YOU WERE
ABLE TO COMMENT ON THE ACCURACY
OF THAT ASSUMPTION OR IF THERE
WAS SOMETHING ELSE MAYBE
HAPPENING AND IF THERE'S GIVEN
IF THAT WERE TRUE, ONE MIGHT
IMAGINE THAT SOME SOME
ADDITIONAL SUPPORT AROUND
BENCHMARKING MIGHT BE
BENEFICIAL AND FOR THOSE OTHER
BUILDINGS THAT MIGHT BE HAVING
TROUBLE NAVIGATING THAT WHICH I
THINK IS ALREADY THERE OR
HAPPENING BUT CAN I CLARIFY
IT'S NOT THIS SLIDE.
>> IT'S THE COMPLIANCE FOR THE
CALENDAR YEAR TWENTY TWENTY ONE
OR FOR THIS AS WELL.
>> I'D LIKE TO TOUCH ON BOTH.
YEAH I BELIEVE I THINK IT WAS
THE I THINK IT WAS THIS ONE
YES.
>> SO THIS IS WHEN WE LOOKED AT
THE METRICS FOR WHO IS
BENCHMARKING ACTUALLY I THINK
THIS IN THE START OF THE REPORT
BUT IN THE METRICS IN THE
REPORT FOR WHO'S BENCHMARKING
WE LOOKED AT EVERYBODY WHO HAS
STARTED BECAUSE WE KNOW WHO
THEY ARE, WHAT THEY ARE, HOW
BIG THEY ARE FOR COMPLIANCE AND
THE ACTUAL PERFORMANCE METRICS.
WE LOOKED AT COMPLIANT
PROPERTIES BECAUSE THOSE
OF THOSE ARE COMPLIANT.
THEY'RE GENERALLY ACCURATE DATA
PARTICIPATING PROPERTIES COULD
BE SOMEONE WHO HAS SET UP THEIR
ACCOUNT AND HAS GAS DATA BUT NO
ELECTRIC DATA, NO WATER DATA.
SO HERE FOR PARTICIPATION THIS
IS JUST FOLKS WHO HAVE STARTED
AND WON.
SO GETTING TO BE KIND OF A LONG
AND MAYBE SPECIFIC ANSWER ON
PROPERTY USE ISN'T THAT
INTRICACIES WE WHEN WE WERE
FOCUSING ON COMPLIANCE BECAUSE
OF HOW THE COMPLIANCE AND
ENFORCEMENT IS PHASED IN, WE
FIRST LOOKED AT TWENTY TWENTY
ONE CALENDAR YEAR LARGER
PROPERTIES TENDED TO BE THOSE
MULTIFAMILY OFFICE PROPERTIES.
SO BY NATURE OF THE JUST THE
CHRONOLOGICAL PRIORITIZATION
THEY WERE THE MORE OFFICE AND
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES HAVE
STARTED.
I'M ACTUALLY NOT I COULD I
COULD LOOK INTO THIS MORE
SPECIFICALLY BUT IT MAY NOT
EVEN BE THE CASE THAT
MULTIFAMILY PROPERTIES ARE MORE
COMPLIANT THAN OTHER PROPERTIES
WHEN YOU GET TO THE NUMBER
OF PROPERTIES IN TERMS
OF PARTICIPATION THAT IS AT
LEAST PART OF WHY MULTIFAMILY
PROPERTIES ARE A HIGH PERCENT
ONE THEY ARE A LOT OF SQUARE
FOOTAGE AND THEY ARE A LOT
OF PROPERTIES BUT WE FOCUS ON
THOSE LARGER PROPERTIES THAT
TEND TO BE THOSE IN TERMS
OF WHAT IS WHAT IS EASIEST AND
THE BARRIERS.
I'M REALLY INTERESTED TO SEE
HOW THAT SHAKES.
AS WE ALLUDED TO EARLIER, LARGE
PROPERTIES CAN HAVE A LOT THAT
THEY HAVE TO WORK OUT IF YOU
HAVE HUNDREDS OF METERS, HOW
MANY ARE THERE WHAT ARE THE
SERVICE ADDRESSES?
DO YOU HAVE IRRIGATION?
DO YOU HAVE THIS?
DO YOU HAVE THAT THE PROPERTIES
THEMSELVES GET MORE COMPLICATED
AND BENCHMARKING SUPPORT OR
UTILITY BUILDING COMPANIES,
DON'T IT?
IT HELPS BUT THEY ARE OFTEN NOT
ON SITE.
SO IT IS KIND OF A CONVERSATION
AMONG A LOT OF PEOPLE.
WE HAD A I HAD A CALL WITH THE
TWENTY THIRTY DISTRICT AND
EIGHT MEMBERS FROM PROPERTY
SUPPORT GROUP BECAUSE THEY HAD
TWO PROPERTIES IN THE CITY AND
DIFFERENT PEOPLE WORKING
DIFFERENT PROPERTIES.
SO GETTING EVERYONE TOGETHER TO
TRY TO WORK THROUGH THAT WHEN
YOU HAVE A SMALLER PROPERTY YOU
MAY HAVE LESS PEOPLE TO WORK
THROUGH BUT THEY HAVE LESS
RESOURCES TO DEDICATE TO
HELPING YOU WITH THAT.
SO I IMAGINE THERE'S GOING TO
BE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES.
I'M NOT SURE WHICH ONE IS GOING
TO BE HARDER OR IF ONE WILL BE
HARDER IN TERMS OF SPECIFICALLY
A SMALLER PROPERTY.
THERE'S JUST PROBABLY FEWER
PEOPLE TO WORK THROUGH TO
FIGURE WHO IS ON THE ACCOUNT
RATHER THAN CONTACTING YOUR
FINANCE DEPARTMENT TO CONTACT
THE BENCHMARK TO SUPPORT TO
FIGURE OUT WHO DOES TO RUN IT
THROUGH CORPORATE GET ACCESS
AND PERMISSION TO BE ADDED TO
THE ACCOUNT AND THEN DO IT SO
THEY HAVE MORE MORE RESOURCES
AND SOME PROPERTIES HAVE EVEN
NOT USED THE DATA HUB BECAUSE
THEY THEY GET ALL THE BILLS AND
THEY BUILD TENANTS THROUGH
UTILITY BUILDING AND THEIR
COMPANY DOES ALL THE
BENCHMARKING.
>> THEY DON'T NEED ANYTHING
FROM US.
A LOT OF PROPERTIES DO SO THERE
ARE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES IN
THIRD PARTY THIRD PARTY
BUILDERS TO ANOTHER.
>> YEAH.
OR IN ONE CASE THE TWO
PROPERTIES SAME MANAGEMENT,
SAME UTILITY BILLING AND
BENCHMARKING SUPPORT COMPANY
ONE HAD PAID FOR BENCHMARKING
SERVICES ALREADY ONE HEPPED SO
THAT THEY THEY SO THE I'LL KEEP
AN EYE ON IT.
I'M NOT I'M NOT SURE WHAT'S
GOING TO BE HARDER BECAUSE
THERE ARE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES
TO IT WHEN IT COMES TO BRING UP
THE DATA HUB A LOT BECAUSE
ALMOST EVERY PROPERTY HAS
CHOSEN TO USE THAT BECAUSE IT'S
JUST THE BEST WAY TO DO IT.
THERE DEFINITELY COULD BE SOME
WAYS THAT SMALLER PROPERTIES
HAVE AN ADVANTAGE TO LESS
LAYERS TO WORK THROUGH FOR THAT
.
BUT WHEN IT COMES TO OTHER
PARTS IT MAY BE TOUGHER BUT
MAYBE ONE PERSON WHO RUNS THE
WHOLE OR IS THE PROPERTY
MANAGER AND DOES ALL THE WORK
AND THEY NEED TO GO FIGURE OUT
HOW MANY METERS THERE ARE HERE
AND THERE DEFINITELY WILL WE'LL
SEE DIFFERENT CHALLENGES IN AND
WE COULD LOOK FURTHER
ESPECIALLY WHEN COMPLIANCES
CREESE TO SEE IF THERE ARE
DIFFERENCES IN PROPERTY USES
THAT WILL TELL US POTENTIALLY
EXACTLY WHAT YOU MENTIONED
OF WHO NEEDS OUR HELP.
IS IT DIFFERENT SIZES?
IS IT DIFFERENT TYPES AND WE
CAN WE CAN LOOK TO TO PUT OUR
SUPPORT TO THE PLACES THAT NEED
IT THE MOST RIGHT NOW IT'S BEEN
CHRONOLOGIC FOCUS BUT I IMAGINE
THAT WILL COME INTO PLAY AS
PARE DOWN WHO NEEDS SUPPORT.
>> YEAH DEFINITELY.
THANK YOU.
THAT WAS THAT WAS REALLY
HELPFUL AND THANK YOU CONNOR
FOR THE PRESENTATION.
CLEARLY THIS IS COMING INTO A
LOT GREATER FOCUS AND CLARITY
AND THIS HAS AND SUPER HELPFUL
I THINK FOR EVERYONE TO MAKE
SENSE OF NOT ONLY THE PROGRAM
BUT ALSO TO START TO THINK
ABOUT THE CONTOURS OF IT AND
HOW IT'S GOING TO PAN OUT IN
DIFFERENT WAYS.
AND I THINK WE SPEAK FOR
EVERYONE WE'RE LOTS OF LOTS
OF ENCOURAGEMENT AND SUCCESS
WITH WITH HELPING HELPING ROLL
IT OUT AND AND AND IMPROVE IT
OVER THE NEXT THE NEXT YEAR OR
TWO.
>> THANKS.
THANK YOU.
I APPRECIATE THAT.
I WILL NOTE FOR THE REPORT IT
IS 66 PAGES.
IT'S A LOT OF CHARTS AND
PICTURES SO IT'S NOT QUITE THAT
LONG IF YOU HADN'T LOOKED
THROUGH THE WHOLE THING IT'S A
LOT OF CHARTS AND PICTURES AND
A GOOD AND A GOOD AND BAD WAY.
IT'S THERE'S A LOT IN THERE SO
YEAH.
>> AND AGAIN ANY QUESTIONS
TONIGHT?
SEND THEM ON OVER.
THERE'S A LOT IN THERE.
I KNOW IT'S THE FIRST REPORT
YOU ALL HAVE SEEN SO ANYTHING
THAT THAT COMES UP PLEASE LET
US KNOW AND WE'LL GET ANSWERS
FOR WHAT WE CAN.
THANK YOU VERY MUCH.
THANK YOU
.
OK, WE'LL BE MOVING ON TO
COMMISSION BUSINESS WE HAVE ON
THE AGENDA ENERGY COMMISSION
TWENTY TWENTY FIVE PRIORITIES
HOPING THIS WILL BE A FAIRLY
BRIEF DISCUSSION IN THE SENSE
THAT WE HEARD FROM COUNCIL
MEMBER BRIGS AND COUNCIL MEMBER
JUST LAST MONTH ON SOME OF THE
PRIORITIES HAVING TO DO WITH
ASOU AS WELL AS COMPREHENSIVE
PLAN AND PERHAPS SOME OF THE
THINGS THAT MIGHT COME TO THE
COMMISSION REGARDING THOSE I
WILL NOTE THAT FOR THE NEXT FEW
MONTHS SOME OF THE THINGS THAT
WE'VE SORT OF SCOPED OUT IN
TERMS OF THE AGENDA HAVE TO DO
OBVIOUSLY THIS MONTH IN TERMS
OF THE BUILDING ENERGY
BENCHMARKING ORDINANCE NEXT
MONTH I THINK WE ARE PLANNING
FOR A AN UPDATE ON THE REBATE
PROGRAM THROUGH OLESYA IN THE
CITY AROUND ENERGY REBATES IN
THE MONTHS FOLLOWING.
I BELIEVE WE WANT TO LOOK AT
ENERGY USE INTENSITY REDUCTIONS
AND IN NEW CONSTRUCTION
POTENTIALLY AND POTENTIAL FOR
SOME RECOMMENDATIONS AROUND
THAT AS WELL AS AN UPDATE ON
THE SEIYU ROLLOUT IS THAT
MATURES AS WELL IN THAT AND
THAT DEVELOPS THROUGH ALSO THE
CITY.
SO THOSE ARE SOME OF THE THINGS
SORT OF NOW THROUGH THE NEXT
FEW MONTHS THAT THAT WE'RE
LOOKING AT AND WE SORT OF HAVE
SCOPED OUT A LITTLE BIT FOR THE
AGENDA BUT IN TERMS OF I'LL
JUST RAISE AND OPEN THE
QUESTION NOW IN TERMS OF THEIR
BROADER PRIORITIES THAT WE WANT
TO FOCUS ON THAT WE MIGHT HAVE
MISSED IN THAT IN THAT UPDATE
FOR THE FOR THE COMMISSION.
COMMISSIONER MASKEY IN THE LIST
THAT YOU JUST MENTIONED, YOU
DID NOT INCLUDE A
RECONSIDERATION OF THE
RESOLUTION FIRST REVIEWED BY
THE COMMISSION IN SEPTEMBER 23
OF LEVYING A CARBON FEE.
>> IS WAS THAT EMBEDDED IN ONE
OF THE TOPICS THAT YOU
MENTIONED OR IS THAT SOMETHING
THAT WASN'T ON THE LIST AND IS
THEREFORE NOT LIKELY TO BE
CONSIDERED IN THE NEXT SEVERAL
MONTHS?
THAT WAS THE ONE I WAS WHEN I
WAS MENTIONING THE ONE
ASSOCIATED WITH THE ENERGY USE
INTENSIVE AND NEW CONSTRUCTION
THAT WAS THAT WAS THAT WAS ONE
THAT WAS SORT OF EMBEDDED IN
THAT AS WELL.
SO I KNOW I KNOW THAT'S THAT'S
BEING WORKED ON AND POTENTIALLY
BEING BROUGHT TO THE COMMISSION
IN THE NEXT MONTH OR TWO.
AND SO I PLAN TO TAKE THAT UP
WHEN WE SEE IT.
>> ANY OTHER COMMENTS OR
SUGGESTIONS?
>> OK, WE WILL MOVE ON THEN TO
THE STAFF REPORT.
I'LL DO MY BEST TO BE BRIEF.
IT'S A LITTLE LONGER THAN
NORMAL BUT I BELIEVE MOST HAVE
HEARD BUT JUST IN CASE ANYONE
HAS NOT BEEN ANN WE DID RECEIVE
A TEN MILLION DOLLAR GRANT FROM
THE US DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY'S
COMMUNITY GEOTHERMAL
TECHNOLOGIES OFFICE TO BEGIN
IMPLEMENTING A COMMUNITY
GEOTHERMAL HEATING AND COOLING
SYSTEM IN THE BRYANT
NEIGHBORHOOD.
FOR THOSE WHO HAVE BEEN
FOLLOWING THIS AWARD FUNDING
REPRESENTS A SECOND PHASE
OF SUPPORT TO ANN ARBOR FROM
THE U.S. DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY.
THE FIRST PHASE SUPPORTED THAT
DEEP ENGAGEMENT
WITH BRIAN
RESIDENCE AS WELL AS OUR
DIFFERENT COLLABORATORS TO
UNDERSTAND THE HEATING AND
COOLING NEEDS AND DESIGN A
SYSTEM CAPABLE OF MEETING THOSE
NEEDS.
THIS SECOND PHASE OF FUNDING
WILL ALLOW THE CITY UNDER A
NEWLY CREATED AND ONGOING
CREATED SUSTAINABLE ENERGY
UTILITY RCU TO BUILD AND
OPERATE A COMMUNITY GEOTHERMAL
SYSTEM TO PROVIDE NEARLY ALL
OF THE HEATING AND COOLING
NEEDS FOR ALL 260 HOMES IN THE
NEIGHBORHOOD ALONG WITH THE
EXPANSION TO THE LOCAL
ELEMENTARY SCHOOL AND THE
GREENS ARE THERE AS WELL AS
ACROSS THE STREET AS FUNDING
COMES IN OVER THE NEXT SEVERAL
MONTHS THE CITY AND OUR
PARTNERS WILL BE FINALIZING THE
DETAILS OF THIS GEOTHERMAL
DESIGN AND INITIATING THE
CONTRACTING PROCESS WITH THE
GOAL OF HAVING A FULLY
OPERATIONAL GEOTHERMAL SYSTEM
IN BRYANT BY 2028.
WE ARE ALSO CURRENTLY HIRING
FOR AN ELECTRIC VEHICLE
COORDINATOR.
THIS POSITION IS GOING TO IS
GRANT FUNDED AND IS FOCUSED ON
DEVELOPING CO LEADING AND
SUPPORTING THE IDENTIFICATION
PLANNING DEVELOPMENT
IMPLEMENTATION AND DEPLOYMENT
OF INCENTIVES AND ELECTRIC
VEHICLE CHARGING INFRASTRUCTURE
THROUGHOUT THE CITY OF ANN
ARBOR.
HE MENTIONED THE POSITION IS
GRANT FUNDED FOR A PERIOD
OF FOUR YEARS AND IF YOU OR
ANYONE YOU KNOW IS INTERESTED
LET THEM KNOW THE JOB POSTING
IS ON THE TWO JOBS WEBSITE
STARTING BACK UP IN TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE TRYING TO REMEMBER
THE YEAR HERE BUT YOU CAN JOIN
THAT THE DOWNTOWN BRANCH OF THE
ENTIRE DISTRICT LIBRARY FOR THE
FIRST SESSION OF THE TWENTY
TWENTY FIVE SUSTAINABILITY
FORUM SERIES AND HEAR DIRECTLY
FROM THE PEOPLE WHO ARE
EXPANDING AND ARBOR'S URBAN
TREE CANOPY CREATING BEAUTIFUL
GREEN GARDENS TO MANAGE
STORMWATER AND REDUCE AIR
POLLUTION AND ESTABLISHING
NATIVE PLANT GARDENS TO SUPPORT
OUR LOCAL POLLINATORS AND LEARN
HOW TO BE PART OF THOSE
INITIATIVES.
WE'RE HAPPY TO ANNOUNCE THAT
PEACE NEIGHBORHOOD IN
PARTNERSHIP WITH THE CITY
OF ARBOR'S OFFICE OF STEENLAND
INVASION'S WAS SELECTED AS ONE
OF 22 COMMUNITY BASED
NONPROFITS FOR THE BUILDINGS
UPGRADES INSPIRING LOCAL
TRANSFORMATION OR BUILT FUNDING
OPPORTUNITIES TO THE US
DEPARTMENT OF ENERGY PEACE WILL
BE RECEIVING UP TO ONE HUNDRED
THOUSAND DOLLARS FOR EFFICIENCY
IMPROVEMENTS THAT WILL LOWER
THEIR ENERGY CONSUMPTION AND
SAVE COSTS ON THEIR ENERGY
BILLS.
THOSE DOLLARS CAN GO DIRECTLY
BACK INTO THE CRITICAL CARE
SERVICES THEY PROVIDE TO OUR
COMMUNITY DAILY AND THE FUNDING
IS HELPING THEM WITH THE
FOUNDATIONAL WORK IN PEACE IS
TRANSITION TO BECOMING ANOTHER
RESILIENCE HUB HERE IN THE
COMMUNITY NEXT TO OUR REPS.
BUT JUST AS A REMINDER, THE
CITY OF ANN ARBOR OSSI IS
INVITING MEMBERS OF THE PUBLIC
TO CONTRIBUTE TO THE EIGHT ZERO
COMMUNITY COOKBOOK FREE
COOKBOOK TO HELP PROMOTE OUR
WORK TOWARDS SUSTAINABLE FOOD
ECOSYSTEM.
THE DEADLINE TO SUBMIT RECIPES,
TIPS AND STORIES IS FEBRUARY
1ST, 2025 AT ELEVEN FIFTY NINE
P.M. AND THEN LASTLY THE
AMBASSADOR APPLICATIONS ARE
STILL OPEN.
FOLK CAN JOIN THE 7TH COHORT OF
EIGHT TO ZERO AMBASSADORS TO
GAIN INCREASED KNOWLEDGE, TOOLS
AND RESOURCES TO DISCUSS
SUSTAINABLY, BROADLY AND
SPECIFIC OPTION ACTIONS YOU AND
YOUR COMMUNITY CAN IMPLEMENT TO
ADVANCE CARBON NEUTRALITY FOLKS
CAN LEARN MORE AT OSSI THAT
ITOU GOV DUGGIE AMBASSADORS AND
THAT IS ALL.
THANK YOU.
>> WE'LL MOVE ON TO REPORTS
FROM COUNCIL
.
>> I GUESS I HAVE AN UPDATE
TRYING TO GET MY BRAIN BACK
INTO THE SPACE OF REMEMBERING
WHAT WE DID.
>> SO ONE THING THAT WAS
NOTABLE IN THE LAST COUNCIL
MEETING IS THAT WE MOVED TO
POSTPONE A PHASE TWO STUDY FOR
THE MUNICIPAL ENERGY UTILITY TO
MAKE SURE THAT WE WERE SORT
BEEN BETTER BETTER ALIGNMENT
WITH COMMUNITY BETWEEN THE
DIFFERENT ENTITIES THAT HAVE
INTEREST IN THIS SUBJECT.
>> SO THAT'S LIKELY TO
ANTICIPATE THAT WOULD COME BACK
TO COUNCIL FOR CONSIDERATION AT
SOME POINT.
BUT I KNOW SOME FOLKS WHO ARE
PAYING ATTENTION.
ENERGY COMMISSION MEETINGS ARE
ALSO TRACKING WHAT'S GOING ON
WITH POTENTIAL FEES TO ME YOU
STUDY SO GOOD JUST JUST TO BY
WAY OF CLARIFICATION IS ARE
THERE ANY ELEMENTS OF THAT THAT
WOULD BE WORTH THAT FOR THE
ENERGY COMMISSION TO CONSIDER
AND WE AND OR OR WHEN DOWN THE
LINE POTENTIALLY DOWN THE LINE?
>> I MEAN I THINK ONE WE HAVE
TO GET TO THE YOU KNOW,
CONTRACTING FOR A PHASE TWO
STUDY WHICH WE HAVE YOU KNOW,
WE HAVE A CONTRACTOR IN MIND
BUT ASSUMING WE CONTRACT FOR
THAT MANY HAS TO GET PAST THAT
GETTING TO THE RESULTS AND THEN
YES, I WOULD ANTICIPATE THAT
THERE IS GOING TO BE INTEREST
AND NEED FOR THE ENERGY
COMMISSION TO TO SHARE SOME
THOUGHTS AS WELL.
>> BUT I'M NOT SURE WHAT THAT
TIMELINE WOULD LOOK LIKE.
YEAH.
THANK YOU.
>> THANK YOU.
AND THEN DID YOU HAVE A COMMENT
ON THAT OR YES.
OK, GOOD.
FRANKLY I WAS DISAPPOINTED TO
HEAR THAT STAFF WENT DIRECTLY
TO CITY COUNCIL WITH A
RECOMMENDATION OF A PHASE TWO
IF WE ALL REMEMBER I THINK IT
WAS IN 2022 OR TWENTY ONE WHERE
WE DEVOTED NEARLY THREE
MEETINGS HERE IN THE ENERGY
COMMISSION WHERE WE HAD
PROBABLY OVER THE COURSE
OF THOSE MEETINGS.
>> THIRTY FIVE SPEAKERS FROM
THE COMMUNITY INCLUDING MANY
FROM ANN ARBOR FOR PUBLIC POWER
WHERE WE TALKED ABOUT THE IDEA
OF A PHASE ONE.
>> WOULD IT NEED TO INCLUDE WE
DEVELOPED A RESOLUTION ON THAT
AND IN THIS CASE THAT
COMPLETELY BYPASSED THIS
COMMISSION WHICH IS SUPPOSED TO
BE MAKING POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS TO COUNCIL AND
I'M YEAH, I'LL JUST LEAVE IT AT
THAT.
>> THAT WAS A DISAPPOINTMENT
AND THEN I WOULD THINK THAT IT
WOULD BE A DISAPPOINTMENT TO
THE REST OF THE COMMISSION AS
WELL.
>> AND THEN ANY UPDATES ON
ENVIRONMENTAL QUESTION?
>> THE ENERGY COMMISSION MET
LAST ON THE 12TH OF DECEMBER.
>> THE ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION
MET PRIOR TO THAT AND DID NOT
HAVE A DECEMBER MEETING AFTER
THAT AND ITS NEXT MEETING WILL
NOT BE UNTIL THIS ONE.
SO THERE'S NO UPDATES FROM THE
ENVIRONMENTAL COMMISSION.
OK, THANK YOU.
>> OK, WE'LL MOVE ON TO THE
LAST OPPORTUNITY FOR PUBLIC
INPUT AGAIN THIS IS AN
OPPORTUNITY FOR THE PUBLIC TO
SPEAK FOR UP TO THREE MINUTES
AND IF YOU'RE WATCHING ON
SUTTON PLEASE CALL EIGHT EIGHT
EIGHT SEVEN EIGHT EIGHT ZERO
ZERO NINE NINE EIGHT SEVEN
SEVEN EIGHT FIVE THREE FIVE TO
FOUR SEVEN AND END ARE MEETING
ID NINE FIVE SIX SEVEN ONE
EIGHT SEVEN EIGHT SEVEN SIX.
>> THIS IS DISPLAYED ON THE
MEETING AGENDA AND ON THE VIDEO
FEED AND CITY STAFF WILL SELECT
CALLERS THAT HAVE RAISED THEIR
HAND USING THE LAST THREE
DIGITS OF YOUR PHONE NUMBER
PLEASE PRESS STAR NINE ON YOUR
PHONE TO ELECTRONICALLY RAISE
YOUR HAND AND YOUR DESIRED
SPEAK OR COME UP TO THE PODIUM
AND IF YOU'D LIKE TO SPEAK AS
WELL WHEN SPEAKING, PLEASE MOVE
TO AN AREA MUTE ANY BACKGROUND
SOUNDS AND PLEASE STATE YOUR
NAME AND ADDRESS AT THE
BEGINNING OF YOUR COMMENTS
.
HERE WE GO.
YOU THINK I WOULD HAVE THIS
DOWN BY NOW SO YEAH.
THANKS FOR THE GREAT
DISCUSSION.
IT'S REALLY GREAT TO BE WITH
YOU IN HERE IN PERSON.
>> YEAH.
BENCHMARKING.
I'M REALLY GLAD THE CITY IS
MAKING REAL PROGRESS ON THIS
AND HAS YOU TOUCHED ON IT
REALLY OPENS UP SOME
POSSIBILITIES OF LEVERAGING
THIS DATA AND THIS INFORMATION
IN ORDER TO GET BETTER
PERFORMANCE OF BUILDINGS.
I'M ESPECIALLY GLAD
COMMISSIONER BERKOVICH BROUGHT
UP PERFORMANCE STANDARDS WHICH
I KNOW NOTHING ABOUT BUT SEEMED
ON THE FACE OF IT SEEM TO MAKE
A LOT OF SENSE.
THERE WAS SEEM TO BE SOME
DISAGREEMENT OVER HOW LEGAL
THAT IS AND THIS SORT OF ECHOES
THE DISCUSSION AROUND GREEN
RENTAL HOUSING ORDINANCE.
>> I MEAN BOTH OF THESE INVOLVE
EXISTING BUILDINGS BUT THE CITY
SEEMS TO BE INVOKING, YOU KNOW,
A WELL KNOWN STATE LAW CALLED
ACTUALLY THIRTY OR THAT IS
STILL THE ROCHEDALE SINGLE
STATE CONSTRUCTION CODE ACT
WHICH WAS DESIGNED OR INTENDED
TO CREATE A UNIFORM
CONSTRUCTION CODE ACROSS THE
STATE OF MICHIGAN AND BUT
DOESN'T EXPLICITLY APPLY TO
EXISTING BUILDINGS AND TO THE
EXTENT SO IT'S A GRAY AREA I
THINK AND I WOULD LOVE TO GET
SOME LEGAL CLARITY OVER HOW
MUCH THAT LAW APPLIES TO OUR
EXISTING BUILDINGS BECAUSE
THAT'S NOT HOW I READ IT.
>> IT DOESN'T REALLY TALK ABOUT
EXISTING BUILDINGS AT ALL BUT
THAT SEEMS TO BE THE INFERENCE
OF OUR CITY LEGAL DEPARTMENT.
SO YEAH, I KNOW COMMISSIONER
LEVIN HIS LEGAL EXPERTIZE BUT
IT'S I DON'T WANT TO PUT THE
WHOLE BURDEN ON HIM BUT I WOULD
LOVE TO GET SOME SOME CLARITY
ON THAT QUESTION BECAUSE I'D
LOVE TO SEE PERFORMANCE
STANDARDS EVEN SOMETHING LIKE
CAMBRIDGE, MASSACHUSETTS HAS
DONE WITH LARGER BUILDINGS
WHICH IS TO PUT A LOT OF FEEB
ON BENCHMARKING PERFORMANCE
THAT WOULD BE LEVIED IN THE
FUTURE.
>> I THINK TWENTY THIRTY FIVE
IS THE DATE THEY HAVE BUT WOULD
HAVE IMPACT HOW BUILDINGS
PERFORM NOW IN ANTICIPATION
OF THAT.
I'M NOT SUGGESTING THAT WE GO
THAT WAY.
I'M JUST SAYING THAT WE IT
WOULD BE NICE TO KNOW WHAT WE
CAN DO LEGALLY AS A CITY.
SO BUT IN THE SHORT TERM I'M
REALLY HAPPY WITH WHAT'S GOING
ON WITH BENCHMARKING AND
FINALLY AND I'M HAPPY YOU GUYS
ARE MEETING IN PERSON SO I HOPE
WE CAN DO MORE OF THESE AND
THANK YOU AGAIN FOR FOR ALL
YOUR WORK.
THANK YOU.
NO FURTHER CALLERS ATTENDEES.
>> THANK YOU AND LAST ITEM ON
OUR AGENDA.
THOSE ARE ITEMS FOR THE NEXT
AGENDA.
AS I HAD PREVIOUSLY MENTIONED,
WE'RE AIMING TO HAVE A
DISCUSSION AND A PRESENTATION
AROUND THE REBATE PROGRAM AND
AN UPDATE ON WHERE THAT STANDS
AND IS THERE ANYTHING ELSE THAT
I DIDN'T TOUCH ON THAT MIGHT BE
USEFUL?
>> YEAH, I WOULD LIKE TO
ADDRESS ONE OTHER TOPIC.
IT'S A TOPIC THAT I ADDRESSED
WITH YOU ABOUT EMAIL VIA EMAIL
AND ALSO IN A ZOO MEETING THE
ENERGY COMMISSION CURRENTLY HAS
NINE MEMBERS.
THE BYLAWS ALLOW FOR UP TO 15
MEMBERS WITH TWO COUNCIL MEMBER
LIAISON'S.
>> THAT MEANS WE ONLY HAVE
SEVEN AT LARGE MEMBERS VERSUS
THIRTEEN WHICH COULD BE THE
CASE WITH THAT EXPERTIZE AND
THOSE PERSONAL EXPERIENCES ETC.
WE HAVE NO YOUTH MEMBERS RIGHT
NOW.
I BROUGHT THIS UP REPEATEDLY
PROBABLY I THINK EVERYBODY
KNOWS EVERY OTHER MEETING OR SO
AND I FRANKLY DON'T UNDERSTAND
WHY OVER THE LAST 18 TO 24
MONTHS THIS IS ALREADY BEFORE
MEMBERS STARTED DROPPING OFF IN
MAY OF TWENTY TWENTY THREE.
>> WHY THOSE SEATS HAVEN'T BEEN
FILLED BY I'D JUST LIKE TO ADD
TO THAT THAT REFLECTS MY
CONCERN THAT THE ENERGY
COMMISSION ISN'T VALUED AS A
POLICY RECOMMENDATION
RECOMMENDING BODY AS IT ONCE
WAS IN THE PAST.
I JUST MADE COMMENTS ABOUT THE
PHASE TWO MUNICIPAL ZATION
STUDY.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT THE WORK THAT
THE ENERGY COMMISSION HAS DONE
IN YEARS PAST VERSUS WHICH IS
DONE MORE RECENTLY I THINK
THERE'S A NUMBER OF OTHER
INDICATORS.
YOU KNOW, IN THE PAST MISSY AS
A DEPARTMENT HEAD USED TO
ATTEND ALL THE MEETINGS I
RECOGNIZE SHE'S MANAGING A MUCH
LARGER DEPARTMENT PURSUING
GRANTS WORTH MILLIONS
OF DOLLARS, ET CETERA, ET
CETERA.
>> IF YOU LOOK AT WE'RE GETTING
A LOT MORE REPORTS AS OPPOSED
TO REALLY LOOKING AT POLICY
RECOMMENDATIONS AND I JUST WANT
TO EXPRESS PUBLICLY THAT I'M
CONCERNED ABOUT THE FUTURE AND
FRANKLY THE PRESENT IN TERMS
OF HOW THE ENERGY COMMISSION IS
VALUED AS A PARTNER IN
DECARBONIZATION WE KNOW THAT
THE GLOBE IS WARMING.
>> IT'S NOW ONE POINT SIX
DEGREES ABOVE PRE-INDUSTRIAL
IZATION.
>> WE KNOW THAT THE GLOBE AND
THE COUNTRY AND THE CITY ARE
NOT DECARBONIZING FAST ENOUGH.
>> IT SEEMS TO ME THIS IS A
CASE WHERE WE NEED TO HAVE ALL
HANDS ON DECK AND RIGHT NOW WE
HAVE A COMMISSION THAT ONLY HAS
NINE HANDS ON DECK AND WE COULD
HAVE FIFTEEN HANDS ON DECK AND
I'M WONDERING IF ANYBODY'S
WILLING TO COMMENT ON THAT.
YEAH, YEAH.
AND I'LL JUST SAY FOR MY PART I
APOLOGIZE BECAUSE I HAD FULLY
INTENDED TO FOLLOW UP IN MORE
DETAIL ON THAT QUESTION WITH
WITH OTHER STAFF AND COUNCIL
MEMBERS TOO BETWEEN THE
COMMISSION MEETINGS I THINK
THAT SLIPPED THROUGH THROUGH MY
HANDS IN THE LAST MONTH OR SO.
I APOLOGIZE FOR THAT.
BUT I'M GOING TO PRIORITIZE
THAT TOO.
ALSO IN THE NEXT COUPLE
OF WEEKS JUST PARTICULARLY NEXT
WEEK AS WE SET THE NEXT AGENDA
TO JUST MAKE SURE THAT WE
FOLLOW UP ON THAT TOPIC AS WELL
JUST TO GET SOME CLARITY ABOUT
WHERE WE'RE HEADED WITH THINGS
AS WELL AND APPOINTMENTS YOU
COUNCIL MEMBER BREAKS AND YOU
KNOW, SIMPLY TO STATE FROM THE
COUNCIL PERSPECTIVE I MEAN AND
AS PREVIOUS COMMISSIONER MYSELF
BEFORE I WAS ON COUNCIL I
SERVED ON MULTIPLE COMMISSIONS.
>> I YOU KNOW, I RECOGNIZE THE
DESIRE TO FUNDAMENTALLY SAY WE
GREATLY APPRECIATE EVERYBODY
WHO TAKES THEIR TIME TO
VOLUNTEER AND SERVE THE CITY ON
EVERY COMMISSION ACROSS THE
CITY.
>> IT IS IT IS YOU KNOW, YOU
COULD BE USING YOUR TIME IN
OTHER WAYS AND OTHER SPACES AND
THE FACT THAT FOLKS ARE WILLING
TO COME AND SERVE ON THESE
COMMISSIONS AND TAKE YOUR TIME
AND YOUR ENERGY AND PROVIDE
FEEDBACK, IT'S REALLY VALUABLE
AND MAYBE IT DOESN'T SEEM AS
VALUABLE IN SOME WAYS TO
PROVIDE FEEDBACK ON A REPORT
LIKE THIS.
>> FROM MY PERSPECTIVE THE
COUNCIL SEAT, IT'S INCREDIBLY
VALUABLE TO HAVE A SET
OF EXPERTIZE EYES THAT ARE
OUTSIDE OF CITY STAFF.
WE DON'T MOST OF US ON CITY
COUNCIL DON'T HAVE TO TECHNICAL
TECHNICAL EXPERTIZE OR IN DEPTH
KNOWLEDGE.
SO TO BE ABLE TO GO IN AND TAKE
A LOOK AT THESE REPORTS AND
PROVIDE FEEDBACK BOTH WAYS IS
IS A REAL SERVICE AND SO I
DON'T DISCOUNT EVEN THE FACT
THE REPORTS ARE YOU KNOW, THAT
THAT IS COMING TO THE
COMMISSION.
>> WE REALLY NEED THAT
PARTICIPATION AND AN INSIGHT
THAT YOU CAN BRING WE'VE TALKED
ABOUT THIS OVER TIME
COMMISSIONS PARTICULARLY ENERGY
COMMISSION, ENVIRONMENTAL
COMMISSION, THE CHANGING
DEPARTMENTS, THE CITY THERE'S A
LITTLE BIT OF A LEARNING CURVE
IN TERMS OF AS WE'VE GROWN OUR
STAFF EXPERTIZE WHAT ARE THE
ROLES OF COMMISSIONS LOOK LIKE
IN PARTICULARLY IN THIS ONE
WHERE WE WHEN WE INCREASE OUR
LEVEL OF INTERNAL CAPACITY?
>> WHAT IS THAT HOW DOES THAT
SHIFT AT THE COUNCIL AT THE
COMMISSION TABLE?
AND YOU KNOW, WE'RE KIND
OF SORTING THROUGH THE THE
PIECES OF THAT AND TRYING TO
FIGURE OUT AS COUNCIL SHIFT TO
YOU KNOW AND WE MOVE FORWARD
WITH PLANS.
>> HOW DO WE HOW DO WE BEST
POSITION OURSELVES TO HAVE THAT
ADVICE THAT WE NEED.
AND SO IT'S NOT ALWAYS SMOOTH
SAILING THAT DOESN'T MEAN THAT
WE DON'T REALLY INCREDIBLY
VALUE FOLKS THAT ARE HERE SO I
THINK WE'RE, YOU KNOW, TRYING
TO SORT THROUGH SOME OF THOSE
QUESTIONS AND HAVING CROSS
COMMISSION CONVERSATIONS AROUND
THIS AND YOU KNOW, I'M SURE
WE'LL WE'LL GET TO THAT IN
TERMS OF FIGURING IT OUT NEXT
STEPS FOR ONE MORE COMMENT IN
TERMS OF PEOPLE THAT ARE
PASSIONATE ON ENERGY AND
CLIMATE AND THEIR WILLINGNESS
TO SERVE AS COMMISSIONERS, I'D
LIKE TO POINT OUT SOMEONE HERE
IN THE ROOM, MR. GARBER WHO
TURNED IN AN APPLICATION TO BE
A COMMISSIONER MANY YEARS AGO
WHEN I WAS CHAIR I'M AWARE
OF OTHER PEOPLE.
IN FACT I MADE RECOMMENDATION
SPECIFICALLY ABOUT PEOPLE WHO
WOULD BE WILLING TO SERVE NO
ONE WHO WORKS 100 PERCENT FULL
TIME IN THE ENERGY FIELD IN
INDUSTRY IS EXTREMELY WELL
INFORMED.
>> SO AS I SAID THROUGH THIS
STEP BY STEP REDUCTION IN THE
MEMBERSHIP OF THE COMMISSION,
WE ARE MISSING AN OPPORTUNITY
FOR PEOPLE TO WEIGH IN ON
BENCHMARKING ON MUNIB MUNICIPAL
CAUSATION STUDIES AND SO ON AND
SO FORTH.
AND AS I SAID, WE NEED ALL
HANDS ON DECK.
>> WE NEED TO DECARBONIZE MUCH
FASTER THAN WE ARE.
>> THAT'S NO NO CRITICISM
OF ANN ARBOR.
>> THE WHOLE GLOBE IS NOT
MOVING FAST ENOUGH AND WE CAN
ONLY SEE THE CONSEQUENCES
OF THAT IN THE LAST WEEKS IN
LOS ANGELES AND EVERY SINGLE
WEEK AROUND THE WORLD.
>> SO I DON'T NEED TO SAY MORE
COMMENTS WILL TAKEN MAVERICKS.
>> I'M JUST GOING TO ADD A
LITTLE BIT TO THAT.
I APPRECIATE APPRECIATE THOSE
COMMENTS.
YOU'RE ABSOLUTELY CORRECT.
YOU KNOW, WE KNOW WE HAVE TO
MOVE RAPIDLY ON THIS THAT WE
HAVE I'M SO PROUD OF THE CITY
STAFF THAT WE HAVE THAT'S
WORKING SO HARD ON THIS AND THE
GROUP OF FOLKS HERE THAT ARE
PUTTING LOTS OF ENERGY IN I
MENTIONED HAVING SERVED IN
PREVIOUS COMMISSIONS PRIOR TO
BEING ON COUNCIL.
I ALSO PUT MY APPLICATION INTO
COMMISSIONS THAT I DID NOT GET
SELECTED FOR AND SO THE FACT
THAT CERTAIN FOLKS DON'T GET
SELECTED COMMISSIONS, IT'S
NOTHING TO DO WITH WITH YOU
KNOW, THERE CAN BE WHOLE LOTS
OF REASONS FOR THAT AND SO
THAT'S GREATLY APPRECIATE
EVERYBODY'S WILLINGNESS AND
THOSE WHO ARE SERVING AS WELL.
I JUST WANT TO THINK BEFORE WE
CLOSE TONIGHT I JUST WANT TO
THANK EVERYONE FOR BEING HERE
AND TAKING THE TIME OUT TO BE
HERE IN COUNCIL CHAMBERS AND
HAVE THE ENERGY COMMISSION
MEETING TONIGHT IN PERSON AND
FOR THE EXTRA EFFORT THAT TOOK
TO GET DOWN HERE.
I THINK IT'S BEEN IT'S VERY
VALUABLE AND IT'S I THINK IT'LL
HELP SET THE TONE FOR THE NEXT
YEAR AS WELL AS CONTINUE THESE
CONVERSATIONS AND MOVE FORWARD
SO I'LL SAY NOW THAT IT'S SEVEN
FIFTY FIVE AND AS CHAIR I
ADJOURN THIS MEETING AND LOOK
FORWARD TO NEXT MONTH.
THANK YOU